The middle level functions consist of basic functions for reading, writing and
creation of structures, text strings, arrays, bitmaps and other items of raw
data. They're contained within the @file{Gap4/IO.c} file and @file{IO.h}
should be #included before usage.

@subsection GT_Read, TextRead, TextAllocRead, DataRead, ArrayRead and BitmapRead
@findex GT_Read(C)
@findex TextRead(C)
@findex TextAllocRead(C)
@findex DataRead(C)
@findex ArrayRead(C)
@findex BitmapRead(C)
@example
#include <IO.h>

int GT_Read(
	GapIO  *io,
	int	rec,
	void   *buf,
	int	len,
	GCardinal type_check);

int TextRead(
	GapIO  *io,
	int	rec,
	char   *buf,
	int	len);

char *TextAllocRead(
	GapIO  *io,
	int	rec);

int DataRead(
	GapIO  *io,
	int	rec,
	void   *buf,
	int	len,
	int	size);

Array ArrayRead(
	GapIO  *io,
	int	rec,
	int	elements);

Bitmap BitmapRead(
	GapIO  *io,
	int	rec,
	int	elements);
@end example

These functions read record number @var{rec} to the buffer @var{buf} of length
@var{len}. Each returns zero for success and an error number for failure.
If the length of the data on disk is less than @var{len} then only @var{len}
bytes are read. If @var{len} is greater than the data on disk then the
remaining bytes in @var{buf} are undefined.

@code{GT_Read} reads arbitrary records of type @var{type_check}. This is
typically a structure; for instance a @var{GContigs} structure with type
@code{GT_Contigs}. For best compatibility, use the @code{contig_read},
@code{gel_read}, @code{tag_read}, @code{vector_read} and @code{clone_read}
function.

@code{Text_Read} reads records of type @code{GT_Text}. This includes sequences
and other text strings. It is possible to read text data containing NULLs, but
this is not advisable.

@code{TextAllocRead} is identical to @code{Text_Read} except that the
necessary memory is allocated using @code{malloc}. This returns the string for
success and NULL for failure.

@code{DataRead} reads records of type @code{GT_Data}. This should be used for
binary data that is not in one of the other principle formats. This includes
reading confidence values and original positions.

@code{ArrayRead} reads records of type @code{GT_Array}. The array is allocated
