@vindex GapIO(C)
@cindex GapIO structure

The main object passed around between the I/O functions is the @var{GapIO}
structure. This is returned from the @code{open_db} function and is then
passed around in much the same manner as a unix file descriptor or @var{FILE}
pointer is. The structure, held in @file{gap4/IO.h}, is as follows.

@example
typedef struct @{
    GapServer *server;		/* our server */
    GapClient *client;		/* ourselves */

    int Nviews;			/* number of locked views */
    Array views;		/* all locked views */

    GDatabase db;		/* main database record */
    Bitmap freerecs;		/* bitmap of unused */
    Array contigs;		/* list of contig */
    Array readings;		/* list of reading records */
    Array annotations;		/* list of annotation records */
    Array templates;		/* list of template records */
    Array clones;		/* list of clone records */
    Array vectors;		/* list of vector records */

    int4 *relpos;		/* relpg[] */
    int4 *length;		/* length[] */
    int4 *lnbr;			/* lnbr[] */
    int4 *rnbr;			/* rnbr[] */

    char db_name[DB_FILELEN];	/* database "file.version" */

    Array contig_order;		/* order of contigs */
    Array contig_reg;		/* Registration arrays for each contig */

#ifdef GAP_CACHE
    Array reading;		/* Array of GReading _structures_ */
    Array read_names;		/* Array of reading names */
#endif
    int freerecs_changed;	/* Whether to flush freerecs bitmap */
    Bitmap updaterecs;		/* bitmap of updated records */
    Bitmap tounlock;		/* bitmap of records to unlock at next flush */
@} GapIO;
@end example

Many of the items held within this structure are used internally by the I/O
functions. However it's worth describing all very briefly.

@table @var
@vindex server, GapIO. (C)
@vindex client, GapIO. (C)
@item  server
@itemx client
	The @var{server} and @var{client} pointers are used in the low level g
	library communication. They need not be used by any external code.

@vindex Nviews, GapIO. (C)
@vindex views, GapIO. (C)
@item  Nviews
@itemx views
	Each record in the database needs to be locked before it can be
	accessed. A view is returned for each independent lock of a record.
	These are used internally by the low level reading and writing
	function.

@vindex db, GapIO. (C)
@item  db
	This is a direct copy of the @var{GDatabase} structure for this
	database. This needs to be kept up to date with the on disk copy
	whenever changes are made (eg by adding a new reading).

@vindex freerecs, GapIO. (C)
@item  freerecs
	This is a copy of the free records bitmap referenced by the
	@var{io->db.freerecs} field. It is kept up to date internally.

@vindex contigs, GapIO. (C)
@vindex readings, GapIO. (C)
@vindex annotations, GapIO. (C)
@vindex templates, GapIO. (C)
@vindex clones, GapIO. (C)
@vindex vectors, GapIO. (C)
@item  contigs
@itemx readings
@itemx annotations
@itemx templates
@itemx clones
@itemx vectors
	These are lookup arrays to convert structure numbers to record
	numbers. For instance, all readings are numbered from 1 upwards.
	Similarly for contigs. However reading number 1 and contig number 1
	will have their own unique record numbers in the g database.

	The extensible array package is used for storing this information. To
	translate from reading number @var{N} to the record number use
	"@code{arr(GCardinal, io->readings, N-1)}".

@vindex relpos, GapIO. (C)
@vindex length, GapIO. (C)
@vindex lnbr, GapIO. (C)
@vindex rnbr, GapIO. (C)
@item  relpos
@itemx length
@itemx lnbr
@itemx rnbr
	These are arrays of 4-byte integers of size
	@var{io->db.actual_db_size}. They hold information about both
	readings and contigs. 

	For readings, the array contents hold copies of the @var{position},
	@var{sequence_length}, @var{left} and @var{right} fields of the
	@var{GReadings} structures. Reading number @var{R} has this data
	stored in array elements @var{R} (counting from element 0, which is
	left blank).
	
	For contigs, the array contents hold copies of the @var{length},
	@var{left} and @var{right} fields of the @var{GContigs} structure. For
	historical reasons the contig length is held in the @var{relpos}
	array with the @var{length} array left blank. Contig number @var{C}
	has this data stored in array elements @var{io->db.actual_db_size-C}.

	For ease of use and future compatibility several macros have been
	defined for accessing this data. _oxref(G4Cio-Macros, IO.h Macros).
	These should be used instead of direct access.	Thus to find the
	length of reading @var{R} we use @code{io_length(io,R)} and to find
	the length of contig @var{C} we use @code{io_clength(io,C)}.

	NOTE: These arrays are not updated automatically. If you modify data
	using one of the write functions you also need to update the arrays in
	sync. This is one of the problems that the check database command
	looks for so mistakes should be obvious.

@vindex db_name, GapIO. (C)
@item  db_name
	The name of the database in a @i{file.version} syntax. This array is
	allocated to be @code{DB_FILELEN} bytes long. The @code{io_name} macro
	should be used for accessing this field.

@vindex contig_order, GapIO. (C)
@item  contig_order
	An array loaded from @var{io->db.contig_order}. This holds the left to
	right ordering of contigs. It is automatically undated by the create
	and delete contig function.

@vindex contig_reg, GapIO. (C)
@item  contig_reg
	The contig registration scheme information. There's an entire chapter
	on this topic. _oxref(Registration, Gap4 Contig Registration Scheme).

@vindex reading, GapIO. (C)
@vindex read_names, GapIO. (C)
@item  reading
@itemx read_names
	These are cached copies of the @var{GReadings} structures and the
	reading names referenced by the @var{GReadings.name} fields. They are
	updated automatically when using the correct functions
	(@code{gel_read} and @code{gel_write}). Use of lower level functions
	is disallowed for accessing this data.

@vindex freerecs_changed, GapIO. (C)
@vindex updaterecs, GapIO. (C)
@vindex tounlock, GapIO. (C)
@item  freerecs_changed
@itemx updaterecs
@itemx tounlock
	These three are used internally for maintaining the update and
	data flushing scheme. @var{freerecs_changed} is a flag to state
	whether or not the @var{freerecs} bitmap needs writing to disk.
	@var{updaterecs} and @var{tounlock} are bitmaps with a bit per record
	to signify whether the record needs rewriting or unlocking. Their use
	is not required outside of the low level functions.
@end table
