@cindex Gap4

This chapter describes the gap4 scripting language. The language is an
extension of the Tcl and Tk languages. This manual does not contain
information on using Tcl and Tk itself - only our extensions.

For the purpose of consistency, many gap4 commands take identical arguments.
To simplify the documentation and to remove redundancy these arguments are
only briefly discussed with each command description. However first we need to
describe the terminology used throughout this manual.

@table @i
@cindex Reading identifier
@vindex identifier
@item Reading identifier
        Used to specify a reading. It can consist of the reading's unique
        name, a hash followed by its reading number, or if it is at the start
        of a contig, an equals followed by the contig number.
        
        Eg @code{fred.s1}, @code{#12}, or @code{=2}.

@cindex Contig identifier
@item Contig identifier
        A contig is identified by any reading within it, so all reading
        identifiers are contig identifiers. However when a contig
        identifier is displayed by a command it typically chooses the left
        most reading name. If a contig number is known, simply use
        @code{=}@i{number} as a contig identifier.
@end table

@noindent Common arguments:
@table @asis
@vindex -contigs
@item @code{-contigs} @i{contig_list}
        @i{Contig_list} is a Tcl list of contig identifiers. If an item in the
        list is itself a list, then the first element of the list is the
        identifier and the second and third elements specify a range
        within that contig.

        Eg @code{-contigs @{read1 @{read5 1000 2000@} read6@}}

@vindex -readings
@item @code{-readings} @i{reading_list}
        @i{Reading_list} is a Tcl list of reading identifiers.

        Eg @code{-reading_list @{read1 read2@}}

@vindex -contig
@item @code{-contig} @i{contig_identifier}
        Specifies a single contig by an indentifier.

@vindex -reading
@item @code{-reading} @i{reading_identifier}
        Specifies a single reading by an identifier.

@vindex -cnum
@item @code{-cnum} @i{contig_number}
        Specifies a contig by its number (NB: this not the same as a reading
        number within that contig).

@vindex -rnum
@item @code{-rnum} @i{reading_number}
        Specifies a reading by its number.

@vindex -io
@item @code{-io} @i{io_handle}
        Specifies an IO handle by a numerical value as returned from a
        previous @code{open_db} command.
@end table
