@cindex compiling
@cindex linking
@vindex GAPDB_EXT_INC
@vindex GAPDB_EXT_OBJS
@vindex GAPDB_EXT_LIBS

If you require usage of the Gap4 I/O functions in a program other than Gap4
itself you will need to compile and link in particular ways to use the
function prototypes and to add the Gap4 functions to your binary. At present,
the object files required for database access do not comprise a library.

The compiler include search path needs adjusting to add the
@file{$STADENROOT/src/gap4} directory and possibly the
@file{$STADENROOT/src/g} directory. Once your own object files are compiled,
they need to be linked with the following gap4 object files.

@table @code
@itemx $STADENROOT/src/gap4/$MACHINE-binaries/actf.o
@itemx $STADENROOT/src/gap4/$MACHINE-binaries/gap-create.o
@itemx $STADENROOT/src/gap4/$MACHINE-binaries/gap-dbstruct.o
@itemx $STADENROOT/src/gap4/$MACHINE-binaries/gap-error.o
@itemx $STADENROOT/src/gap4/$MACHINE-binaries/gap-if.o
@itemx $STADENROOT/src/gap4/$MACHINE-binaries/gap-init.o
@itemx $STADENROOT/src/gap4/$MACHINE-binaries/gap-io.o
@item  $STADENROOT/src/gap4/$MACHINE-binaries/gap-local.o
@itemx $STADENROOT/src/gap4/$MACHINE-binaries/gap-remote.o
@itemx $STADENROOT/src/gap4/$MACHINE-binaries/IO.o
@itemx $STADENROOT/src/gap4/$MACHINE-binaries/io_handle.o
@itemx $STADENROOT/src/gap4/$MACHINE-binaries/io-reg.o
@itemx $STADENROOT/src/gap4/$MACHINE-binaries/io_utils.o
@itemx $STADENROOT/src/gap4/$MACHINE-binaries/text-io-reg.o
@end table

Finally, a library search path of @file{$STADENROOT/lib/$MACHINE-binaries}
should be used to link the @code{-lg -ltext_utils -lmisc} libraries.

All of the above definitions have been added to a single Makefile held in
@file{$STADENROOT/src/mk/gap4_defs.mk} as the @code{GAPDB_EXT_INC},
@code{GAPDB_EXT_OBJS} and @code{GAPDB_EXT_LIBS} variables. When possible,
these should be used in preference to hard coding the variable object
filenames as this provides protection against future coding changes.
So for example, if we have a program held in the file @file{demo.c} we could
have a simple Makefile as follows.

@example
SRCROOT=$(STADENROOT)/src
include $(SRCROOT)/mk/global.mk
include $(SRCROOT)/mk/$(MACHINE).mk

OBJS = $(O)/demo.o

LIBS = $(MISC_LIB)

$(O)/demo: $(OBJS)
        $(CLD) -o $@ $(OBJS) $(LIBS) $(LIBSC)
@end example

If we now extend this program so that it requires the Gap4 I/O routines, the
Makefile should be modified to:

@example
SRCROOT=$(STADENROOT)/src
include $(SRCROOT)/mk/global.mk
include $(SRCROOT)/mk/$(MACHINE).mk
include $(SRCROOT)/mk/gap4_defs.mk

INCLUDES_E += $(GAPDB_EXT_INC)

OBJS = $(O)/demo.o $(GAPDB_EXT_OBJS)

LIBS = $(MISC_LIB) $(GAPDB_EXT_LIBS)

$(O)/demo: $(OBJS)
        $(CLD) -o $@ $(OBJS) $(LIBS) $(LIBSC)
@end example

If you require an example of a program that utilises the Gap4 I/O functions,
see the @code{convert} program in @file{$STADENROOT/src/convert/}.
