This manual is a guide to programming with the newer Tcl/Tk based Staden
Package programs. It covers both using the programs in a scripting environment
and writing modules to extend the functionality of them. The main content
current covers the Tcl interfaces, with very little of the C functions
currently documented. The reader should also be familier with the Tcl
language.


@unnumberedsec Conventions Used in This Manual

@exdent @i{Italic} is used for:
@itemize @bullet
@item variable names
@item command line values
@item structure fields
@end itemize

@exdent @code{Fixed width bold} is used for:
@itemize @bullet
@item Code examples
@item Command line arguments
@item Typed in commands
@item Program output
@end itemize

@sp 1
The general format of the syntax for the more complex Tcl commands is to list
the command name in bold followed by one or more command line arguments in
bold with command line values in italic. The command line values have a
brief description of the use of the value followed by the type and a default
value. The Tcl convention of surrounding optional values in question marks is
used. For instance the @code{edit_contig} command has the following syntax.

@example
@group
@exdent @code{edit_contig}
 -io            @i{io_handle:integer}
 -contig        @i{identifier:string}
?-reading       @i{identifier:string()}?
?-pos           @i{position:integer(1)}?
@end group
@end example

@sp 1
@code{-io} and @code{-pos} both take integer values. @code{-pos} is
optional, and has a default value of 1. @code{-contig} and @code{-reading}
both require string values. @code{-reading} is optional, and has a default
value of a blank string.
