.TH "ExperimentFile" 4 "" "" "Staden Package"
.SH "NAME"
.PP
ExperimentFile \- Experiment File Format

.SH "Experiment File"
.PP

Experiment files contain gel readings plus information about them, and are
used during the processing of the sequence. They are used to carry data
between programs: they provide input to the programs and programs may in
turn add to or modify them. When the experiment file for a reading reaches
the assembly program it should be carrying all the data needed for its
subsequent processing. The assembly program will copy what it needs into
the assembly database. The file format is based on that of EMBL sequence
entries and, if required, can be read as such by programs like spin.

_split()

.SS "Records"
.PP

It is important to note that the assembly program gap4
(_fpref(Gap4-Introduction, Gap4 introduction, gap4))
will not operate to
its full effect if it is not given all the necessary data. For example
gap4 contains many functions that can analyse the positions and relative
orientations of readings from the same template in order to check the
correctness of the assembly and determine the contig order. However if
the records that name templates and their estimated lengths, and define
the primers used to obtain readings from them are missing, none of these
valuable analyses can be performed reliably. One way to ensure that all
the necessary fields are present is to use the program pregap4
(_fpref(Pregap4-Introduction, Pregap4 introduction, pregap4)).

In the descriptions below records containing * are those read into the
database during normal assembly; those with ** are extra items required when
entering pre-assembled data; those with *** are read from SCF files
(after the experiment file has been read to obtain the SCF file name);
(_fpref(Formats-Scf, SCF introduction, scf))
the record marked **** is an extra item required for Directed Assembly.

The order of records in the file is not important. They are listed
here in alphabetical order with, where possible, reasons for the 
origin of their names. Several are redundant and no group is likely
to make use of them all. Obviously others can be added in the future.
Initially they might be of local use but if their use becomes wider they
can be added to the standard set. Standard EMBL records such as FT are
assumed to be included.

.nf
.BR AC "  ACcession number"
.BR AP "  Assembly Position ****"
.BR AQ "  AVerage Quality for bases 100..200"
.BR AV "  Accuracy values for externally assembled data **, ***"
.BR BC "  Base Calling software"
.BR CC "  Comment line"
.BR CF "  Cloning vector sequence File"
.BR CH "  Special CHemistry"
.BR CL "  Cloning vector Left end"
.BR CN "  Clone Name"
.BR CR "  Cloning vector Right end"
.BR CS "  Cloning vector Sequence present in sequence *"
.BR CV "  Cloning Vector type"
.BR DR "  Direction of Read"
.BR DT "  DaTe of experiment"
.BR EN "  Entry Name"
.BR EX "  EXperimental notes"
.BR FM "  sequencing vector Fragmentation Method"
.BR ID "  IDentifier *"
.BR LE "  was Library Entry, but now identifies a well in a micro titre dish"
.BR LI "  was subclone LIbrary but now identifies a micro titre dish"
.BR LN "  Local format trace file Name *"
.BR LT "  Local format trace file Type *"
.BR MC "  MaChine on which experiment ran"
.BR MN "  Machine generated trace file Name"
.BR MT "  Machine generated trace file Type"
.BR ON "  Original base Numbers (positions) **"
.BR OP "  OPerator"
.BR PC "  Position in Contig **"
.BR PD "  Primer data (the sequence of a primer)"
.BR PN "  Primer Name"
.BR PR "  PRimer type *"
.BR PS "  Processing Status"
.BR QL "  poor Quality sequence present at Left (5') end *"
.BR QR "  poor Quality sequence present at Right (3') end *"
.BR RS "  Reference Sequence for numbering and mutation detection"
.BR SC "  Sequencing vector Cloning site"
.BR SE "  SEnse (ie whether complemented) **"
.BR SF "  Sequencing vector sequence File"
.BR SI "  Sequencing vector Insertion length *"
.BR SL "  Sequencing vector sequence present at Left (5') end *"
.BR SP "  Sequencing vector Primer site (relative to cloning site)"
.BR SQ "  SeQuence *"
.BR SR "  Sequencing vector sequence present at Right (3') end *"
.BR SS "  Screening Sequence"
.BR ST "  STrands *"
.BR SV "  Sequencing Vector type *"
.BR TG "  Gel reading Tag *"
.BR TC "  Contig Tag *"
.BR TN "  Template Name *"
.BR WT "  Wild type trace"
.fi
_split()

.SS "Explanation of Records"
.PP


.PD 0
.IP Record 13
AC, ACcession line
.IP Format 13
AC   string
.IP Explanation 13
A unique identifier for the reading.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
AP, Assembly Position
.IP Format 13
AP   Name_of_anchor_reading sense offset tolerance
.IP Explanation 13
For readings whose position has been mapped by an external program, these
records tell the "directed assembly" algorithm where to assemble the data.
Positions are defined as offsets from an "anchor reading" which is the name of
any reading already in the database, an orientation (sense, + or -), and a
tolerance. Readings are aligned at relative position offset + or - tolerance.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
AQ, Average Quality of the reading.
.IP Format 13
AQ   Numeric value in range 1 - 99.
.IP Explanation 13
The average value of the "numerical estimate of base calling accuracy" as
calculated by program eba. The value is useful for monitoring data quality and
could also be used for deciding on an order of assembly - for example assemble
the highest quality readings first.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
AV, Accuracy Values
.IP Format 13
AV   q1 q2 q3 @dots{} or a1,c1,g1,t1 a2,c2,g2,t2 @dots{}
.IP Explanation 13
The accuracy values lie in the range 1-99. Either 1 per base (eg 89 50 @dots{}
or 4 per base (eg 0,89,5,2 50,3,7,10). @cite{Bonfield,J.K and Staden,R.
The application of numerical estimates of base calling accuracy to DNA
sequencing projects. Nucleic Acids Res. 23 1406-1410, (1995)}.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
BC, Base Calling software
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
CC, Comment line
.IP Format 13
CC   string
.IP Explanation 13
Any comments can be added on any number of lines.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
CF, Cloning vector sequence File
.IP Format 13
CF   string
.IP Explanation 13
The name of the file containing the sequence of the cloning vector, to be used
by vector_clip (_fpref(Vector_Clip, Screening Against Vector Sequences, vector_clip)).

.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
CH, Special CHemistry
.IP Format 13
CH   number
.IP Explanation 13
Used to flag readings as having been sequenced using a "special chemistry". The
number is a bit pattern with a bit for each chemistry type, thus allowing
combinations of chemistries to be listed. Currently bit 0 is used to
distinguish between dye-primer (0) and dye-terminator (1) chemistries. Bits 1
to 4 inclusive indicate the type of chemistry: unknown (0, 0000), ABI
Rhodamine (1, 0001), ABI dRhodamine (2, 0010), BigDye (3, 0011), Energy
Transfer (4, 0100) and LiCor (5, 0101). So for example a BigDye Terminator has 
bits 00111 set which is 7 in decimal.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
CL, Cloning vector Left end
.IP Format 13
CL   number
.IP Explanation 13
The base position in the sequence that contains the last base in the cloning
vector. Currently gap4 only uses the CS line.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
CN, Clone Name
.IP Format 13
CN   string
.IP Explanation 13
The name of the segment of DNA that the reading has been
derived from. Typically the name of a physical map clone. 
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
CR, Cloning vector Right end
.IP Format 13
CR   number
.IP Explanation 13
The base position in the sequence that contains the first base in the cloning
vector. Currently gap4 only uses the CS line.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
CS, Cloning vector Sequence present in sequence
.IP Format 13
CS   range
.IP Explanation 13
Regions of sequence found by vector_clip 
(_fpref(Vector_Clip, Screening Against Vector Sequences,
vector_clip)) to be cloning vector. Used in assembly to
exclude unwanted sequence.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
CV, Cloning Vector type
.IP Format 13
CV   string
.IP Explanation 13
The type of the cloning vector used.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
DR, Direction of Read
.IP Format 13
DR   direction
.IP Explanation 13
Whether forward or reverse primers were used. Allows
mapping of forward and reverse reads off the same template. NOTE however
that we do not encourage the use of this method as the terms
direction, sense and strand can be confusing. Instead we encourage the
use of the PRimer line.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
DT, DaTe of experiment
.IP Format 13
DT   dd-mon-yyyy
.IP Explanation 13
Any date information.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
EN, Entry Name
.IP Format 13
EN   string
.IP Explanation 13
The name given to the reading
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
EX, EXperimental notes
.IP Format 13
EX   string
.IP Explanation 13
Another type of comment line for additional information.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
FM, sequencing vector Fragmentation Method
.IP Format 13
FM   string
.IP Explanation 13
Fragmentation method used to create sequencing library.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
ID, IDentifier
.IP Format 13
ID   string
.IP Explanation 13
This is the name given to the reading inside the assembly database
and is equivalent to the ID line of an EMBL entry.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
LE, Can be used to identify the location of materials
.IP Format 13
LE   string
.IP Explanation 13
Originally a micro titre dish well number. Used in
combination with LI.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
LI, Can be used to identify the location of materials
.IP Format 13
LI   string
.IP Explanation 13
Originally a micro titre dish identifier. Used in
combination with LE.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
LN, Local format trace file Name
.IP Format 13
LN   string
.IP Explanation 13
The name of the local format trace file. This information is passed
onto gap4, and allows for local formats to be used.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
LT, Local format trace file Type
.IP Format 13
LT   string
.IP Explanation 13
The type of the local trace file type (usually SCF).
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
MC, MaChine on which sequencing experiment was run
.IP Format 13
MC   string
.IP Explanation 13
The lab's name for the sequencing machine used to create the data.
Used for logging the performance of individual machines.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
MN, Machine generated trace file Name
.IP Format 13
MN   string
.IP Explanation 13
The name of the trace file generated by the sequencing machine MC.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
MT, Machine generated trace file Type
.IP Format 13
MT   string
.IP Explanation 13
The type of machine generated trace file.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
ON, Original base Numbers (positions)
.IP Format 13
ON   (eg) 1..43 0 45..63 65..74 0 75..536
.IP Explanation 13
The A..B notation means that values A to B inclusive, so this example reads
that bases 1 to 43 are unchanged, there is a change at 44, etc.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
OP, OPerator
.IP Format 13
OP   string
.IP Explanation 13
Someone's name, possibly the person who ran the
sequencing machine. Useful, with expansion of the string field for
monitoring the performance of individuals!
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
PC,  Position in Contig
.IP Format 13
PC    number
.IP Explanation 13
For preassembled data, the position to put the left end of the reading.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
PD,  Primer Data
.IP Format 13
PD    sequence
.IP Explanation 13
The primer sequence.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
PN, Primer Name
.IP Format 13
PN   string
.IP Explanation 13
Name of primer used, using local naming convention. Could be a
universal primer. 
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
PR, PRimer type
.IP Format 13
PR   number
.IP Explanation 13
This record shows the direction of the reading and distinguishes between
primers from the ends of the insert and those that are internal. It is
important for the analysis of the relative orientations and positions of
readings on templates. When the positions of readings on templates are
analysed (_fpref(Read Pairs, Find read pairs, read_pairs)) primer types
1,2,3 and 4 are represented using the symbols F,R,f and r respectively.

.nf
.BR 0 "  Unknown"
.BR 1 "  Forward from beginning of insert"
.BR 2 "  Reverse from end of insert"
.BR 3 "  Custom forward i.e. a forward primer other than type 1."
.BR 4 "  Custom reverse i.e. a reverse primer other than type 2."
.fi
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
PS, Processing Status
.IP Format 13
PS   explanation
.IP Explanation 13
Indication of processing status. 
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
QL, poor Quality sequence present at Left (5') end
.IP Format 13
QL   position
.IP Explanation 13
The sequence up to and including the base at the marked position are
considered to be of too poor quality to be used. 
It may overlap with other marked
sequences - CS, SL or SR. Used in assembly to exclude unwanted sequence.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
QR, poor Quality sequence present at Right (3') end
.IP Format 13
QR   position
.IP Explanation 13
The sequence from and including the base at the marked position to the
end is considered to be of too poor quality to be used. It may overlap with
other marked sequences - CS, SL or SR. Used in assembly to exclude
unwanted sequence.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
RS, Reference Sequence
.IP Format 13
RS   string
.IP Explanation 13
The name of a sequence, usually in EMBL format, used to define the target
sequence, base numbering 
and feature table data for a project. Used to define the numbering and
changes produced by mutations in individual sequence readings
(_fpref(Mutation-Detection-Introduction, Introduction to mutation detection,t)).
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
SC, Sequencing vector Cloning site
.IP Format 13
SC   position
.IP Explanation 13
The cloning site of the sequence vector. Used by vector_clip 
(_fpref(Vector_Clip, Screening Against Vector Sequences, vector_clip)).
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
SE, SEnse (ie whether complemented)
.IP Format 13
SE   number
.IP Explanation 13
For preassembled data, the sense of the reading (0 for forward, 1 for
reverse).
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
SF, Sequencing vector sequence File
.IP Format 13
SF   string
.IP Explanation 13
The name of the file containing the sequence of the 
sequencing vector, to be used by vector_clip 
(_fpref(Vector_Clip, Screening Against Vector Sequences, vector_clip)).
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
SI, Sequencing vector Insertion length
.IP Format 13
SI   range
.IP Explanation 13
Expected insertion length of sequence in sequencing
vector. Useful for selecting templates for further experiments.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
SL, Sequencing vector sequence present at Left (5') end
.IP Format 13
SL   position
.IP Explanation 13
The sequence up to and including the base at the marked 
position are considered to be sequencing vector. Written by vector_clip
(_fpref(Vector_Clip, Screening Against Vector Sequences, vector_clip)).
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
SP, Sequencing vector Primer site (relative to cloning site)
.IP Format 13
SP   position
.IP Explanation 13
Location of the primer using to sequence relative to cloning site.
Used by vector_clip 
(_fpref(Vector_Clip, Screening Against Vector Sequences, vector_clip)).
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
SQ, SeQuence
.IP Format 13
SQ   \\nsequence blocks@dots{}\\n//\\n
.IP Explanation 13
Complete sequence, as determined by the sequencing machine. The sequence is
broken into blocks of 10 bases with 6 blocks per line separated by a space
(see the example below).
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
SR, Sequencing vector sequence present at Right (3') end
.IP Format 13
SR   position
.IP Explanation 13
The sequence from and including the base at the marked 
position to the end are considered to be sequencing vector. Written by
vector_clip 
(_fpref(Vector_Clip, Screening Against Vector Sequences, vector_clip)).
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
SS, Screening Sequence
.IP Format 13
SS   string
.IP Explanation 13
Note that in earlier versions of this documentation this field was explained
incorrectly. Due to this the field is not currently being used by any of our
programs. The original meaning was to specify a sequence to screen against.
Any number of SS lines could be present to denote any number of screening
sequences. In the future we may change the meaning of this field to be a
single SS line containing a file of filenames of screening sequences. If this
causes problems for people then we will choose a new line type, so please
inform us now. Also note that contrary to previous documentation, vector_clip does
not use this field (it uses the SF field instead).
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
ST, STrands
.IP Format 13
ST   number
.IP Explanation 13
Denotes whether this is a single or double stranded template. This
is useful for deducing suitable templates for later experiments.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
SV, Sequencing Vector type
.IP Format 13
SV   string
.IP Explanation 13
Type of sequencing vector used. Can be used for choosing
templates for custom primer experiments.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
TC, Tag to be placed on the Consensus.
.IP Format 13
TC   TYPE S position..length
.IP Explanation 13
These lines instruct gap4 to place tags on the consensus.
The format defines the tag type which is a 4 character identifier
and should start at column position 5), its strand  ( "+", "-" or
"=" which means both strands), its start position followed by the
position of its end. These two values are separated by "..". Following
lines starting TG with space characters up to column 10 are written
into the comment field of the tag. For example the next three lines
define a tag of type comment that is to be on both strands over the
range 100 to 110 and the comment field will contain "This comment
contains several lines".
.nf
.in +0.5i
TC   COMM = 100..110
TC        This comment contains
TC          several lines
.in -0.5i
.fi
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
TG, Tag to be placed on the reading.
.IP Format 13
TG   TYPE S position..length
.IP Explanation 13
These lines instruct gap4 to place tags on the reading.
See TC for further information.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
TN, Template Name
.IP Format 13
TN   string
.IP Explanation 13
The name of the template used in the experiment.
.sp
.PD
.PD 0
.IP Record 13
WT, Wild Type trace file
.IP Format 13
WT   string
.IP Explanation 13
The filename of the wild type trace file. Used for mutation studies.
.sp
.PD
_split()

.SS "Example"
.PP

.nf
.in +0.5i
ID   h4a01h6.s1
EN   h4a01h6.s1
TN   h4a01h6
EX   lane 18, run time 10 hrs
MN   Sample 18
MC   A
MT   ABI
LN   h4a01h6.s1SCF
LT   SCF
DT   08-Jan-1993
OP   ak
TN   h4a01h6
SV   M13mp18
SF   /pubseq/seqlibs/vectors/m13mp18.seq
SI   1000..2000
SC   6249
PN   -21
PR   1
DR   +
SP   41
ST   1
CN   3G9
CV   sCos-1
CF   /pubseq/seqlibs/vectors/sCos-1.seq
SS   /pubseq/seqlibs/vectors/m13mp18.seq
SQ
     GCTTGCATGC CTGCAGGTCG ACTCTAGAGG ATCCCCAACC AGTAAGGCAA CCCCGCCAGC
     CTAGCCGGGT CCTCAACGAC AGGAGCACGA TCATGCGCAC CCGTCAGATC CAGACATGAT
     AAGATACATT GATGAGTTTG GACAAACCAC AACTAGAATG CAGT-AAAAA AATGCTTTAT
     TTGTGAAATT TGTGATGCTA TTGCTTTATT TGTAACCATT ATAAGCTGCA ATAAACAAGT
     TAACAACAAC AATTGCATTC ATTTTATGTT TCAGGTTCAG GGGGAGGTGT GGGAGGTTTT
     TTAAAGCAAG TAAAACCTCT ACAAATGTGG TATGGCTGAT TATGATCTCT AGTCAAGGCA
     CTATACATCA AATATT-CCT TATTAACCCC CTTTACAAAT TTAAAAGGCT -AAAGGGTCC
     ACAATTTTTG -GCCTAGGTA TTAATAGCCG GCACTTCTT- TGCCTGTTTT GG-GTAGGG-
     AAAACCGGTA TGTTT-TGGT T-TTC
//
QL   0
QR   281
SL   36
SR   506
CS   37..280
PS   Completely cloning vector
.in -0.5i
.fi

_split()

.SS "Unsupported Additions (From LaDeana Hillier)"
.PP

Note the clash on AP which the io-lib uses for "Assembly Position"
and PC which is used for "Position in Contig"

.nf
.in +0.1i
People to track:
TP Template Prep person
QP Sequencer Person, person who does sequencing reactions
LP Loader Person
AL Agar Loader person (when they run a gel to determine SI)
AP Agar reaction Person   (person who does the reactions to prepare
                        the template to be run on a gel)

Gel specific information
GN Gel Name
GL Gel Lane
GP Gel Pourer person
AG Agar Gel name (sizing gel)
AF Agar Fate, no insert, no bands, what else?

Name of library
LB  Library name, probably not critical to assembly even though
        one CN may have more than one library.  But it is important
        to the cDNA project although I could put it in CN, since
        the cDNA project wouldn't have a CN otherwise.

Processing information
PC processing comment (a comment about PS)
        I think PS should just hold pass or fail and PC should hold
        additional information about why things passed.

Trace information gotten from the ABI machine (from info field in SCF file):
TS   Trace Spacing
DP   Dye Primer
HA   signal strengtH A
HG   signal strengtH G
HC   signal strengtH C
HT   signal strengtH T

(NOTE rs suggested these should go in a single record

PP   Primer Position  (position at which primer peak was detected in trace)

Stuff most likely specific to the cDNA project:
MP Map Position 
TT Tissue Type of the library
EI dbEst Id  
ER dbEst Remark
OE Other Est's which are similar
NI NCBI ID
GB GenBank accession number
SD Submission Date (when est was submitted)
UD Update date (when it was last updated)
CI citation associated with this cDNA
.in -0.1i
.fi
