.TH "init_exp" 1 "" "" "Staden Package"
.SH "NAME"
.PP
init_exp \- create and initialise an Experiment File

.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.PP

\fBinit_exp\fP [\fB-\fP(\fBabi\fP|\fBalf\fP|\fBscf\fP|\fBpln\fP)]
[\fB-output\fP \fIfile\fP] [\fB-name\fP \fIentry_name\fP] [\fB-conf\fP] \fIfile\fP

.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP

\fBinit_exp\fP initiates an Experiment File for a binary trace file or
a plain sequence file. The Experiment File created
contains the \fBID\fP, \fBEN\fP, \fBLN\fP, \fBLT\fP and \fBSQ\fP
lines.

The experiment file is, by default, sent to standard output, unless an
output file is specified using the \fB-output\fP option. The default
entry name for the Experiment File is derived from the filenames used.
If an output file has been specified, then this is taken as the
\fBEN\fP field. Otherwise the input file name is used. The user can
override the default by using the \fB-name\fP option.

.SH "OPTIONS"
.PP

.TP
\fB-abi\fP, \fB-alf\fP, \fB-scf\fP, \fB-pln\fP
Specify an input file format. This is not usually required as
\fBinit_exp\fP will automatically determine the correct input file
type. This option is supplied incase the automatic determination is
incorrect (which is possible, but has never been observed).

.TP
\fB-output\fP \fIfile\fP
The experiment file will be written to \fIfile\fP instead of standard
output. Additionally the value of the \fBEN\fP and \fBID\fP
fields, assuming \fB-name\fP has not been specified, will be \fIfile\fP.

.TP
\fB-name\fP \fIname\fP
Sets the \fBID\fP and \fBEN\fP fields to \fIname\fP, regardless of
the output filename used.

.TP
\fB-conf\fP
Fills out the \fBAV\fP field with the quality values found in the SCF
file.

.TE
.SH "NOTES"
.PP

This program was formerly known as \fBexpGetSeq\fP.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP

\fBExperimentFile\fR(4)
\fBRead\fP(4)
