.TH "makeSCF" 1 "" "" "Staden Package"
.SH "NAME"
.PP
makeSCF \- Converts trace files to SCF files.

.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.PP

\fBmakeSCF\fP [\fB-8\fP] [\fB-2\fP] [\fB-3\fP]
-(\fBabi\fP|\fBalf\fP|\fBscf\fP|\fBpln\fP) \fIinput_name\fP
[\fB-compress\fP \fIcompression_mode\fP] [\fB-normalise\fP
[\fB-output\fP \fIoutput_name\fP]

.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP

\fBMakeSCF\fP converts trace files to the SCF format. It can input ABI 373A,
Pharmacia A.L.F., or previously created SCF files (although converting from
SCF to SCF serves no useful purpose!). 

.SH "OPTIONS"
.PP

.TP
\fB-8\fP
Force conversion to 8 bit sample data. This shrinks the size of SCF
files using 16 bit sample values, but at a loss of resolution. For trace
display purposes this accuracy loss is acceptable.

.TP
\fB-2\fP
Force the output to be written in SCF version 2. By default the
latest version (3) is used.

.TP
\fB-3\fP
Force the output to be written in SCF version 3. This is the default.

.TP
\fB-s\fP
Silent mode. This prevents the output of the copyright message.

.TP
\fB-abi\fP, \fB-alf\fP, \fB-scf\fP, \fB-any\fP
Specify an input file format. A file format of "any" will force
\fBmakeSCF\fP to automatically determine the correct input file type.

.TP
\fB-compress\fP \fIcompression_mode\fP
Requests the generated SCF file to be passed through a separate compression
program before writing to disk. \fBmakeSCF\fP does not contain any
compression algorithms itself. It requires the appropriately named tool to
be on the system and in the user's @r{PATH}.
Valid responses for \fIcompression_mode\fP are (in order of best compression
first) \fBbzip\fP, \fBgzip\fP, \fBcompress\fP and \fBpack\fP. Note
that \fBbzip\fP at present is only bzip version 1 and that bzip version 2
is incompatible.

.TP
\fB-normalise\fP
Performs some very simple trace normalisation. This subtracts the
background signal (by defining the background signal to be the lowest of
the four traces) and rescales the peak heights, averaging the height over
a `window' of 1000 trace sample points. This option may be useful
for some unscaled ALF files.

.TP
\fB-output\fP \fIfile\fP
Specifies the filename for the SCF file to be produced. If this is not
specified the SCF file will be sent to standard output.
.TE
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.PP

To convert an ABI 373A trace:

.nf
.in +0.5i
\fBmakeSCF -8 -abi trace.abi -output trace.scf\fP
.in -0.5i
.fi

To convert an ALF archive to individual SCF files (Warning! this 
will most certainly fail if your clone names contain spaces):

.nf
.in +0.5i
\fBalfsplit trace.alf | awk '/^Clone/ {print $3 "ALF"@\fP' > trace.files}

\fBsh -c 'for i in `cat trace.files`;do makeSCF -alf $i -output\fP
\fB    $i.scf;done\fP
.in -0.5i
.fi

.SH "NOTES"
.PP

If ABI and A.L.F files are edited before input to makeSCF the contents of
the resulting SCF files are unpredictable.
To use Pharmacia A.L.F. files the \fBalfsplit\fP program should first
be used. Then \fBmakeSCF\fP should be run on each of the split files.
See the example above.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP

\fBscf\fR(4)
\fBconvert_trace\fR(1)
\fBeba\fR(1)

