@menu
* Compar-Examining::            Examining Results
* Compar-AutoNavigation::       Automatic Match Navigation
@end menu

@cindex Comparator window
@cindex Contig Comparator

_ifdef([[_gap4]],[[__Prog__ commands such as Find Internal Joins
(_fpref(FIJ, Find Internal Joins, fij)), Find Repeats (_fpref(Repeats,
Find Repeats, repeats)), Check Assembly (_fpref(Check Assembly, Check
Assembly, check_ass)), and Find Read Pairs (_fpref(Read Pairs, Find
Read Pairs, read_pairs))]],[[__Prog__ commands such as Find Internal Joins
(_fpref(FIJ, Find Internal Joins, fij)) and Find Repeats (_fpref(Repeats,
Find Repeats, repeats))]])
automatically transform the Contig Selector (_fpref(Contig Selector,
Contig Selector, contig_selector)) to produce the Contig Comparator.  To
produce this transformation a copy of the Contig Selector is added at
right angles to the original window to create a two dimensional
rectangular surface on which to display the results of comparing or
checking contigs. Each of the functions plots its results as diagonal
lines of different colours.  If the plotted points are close to the main
diagonal they represent results from pairs of contigs that are in the
correct relative order.  Lines parallel to the main diagonal represent
contigs that are in the correct relative orientation to one another.
Those perpendicular to the main diagonal show results for which one
contig would need to be reversed before the pair could be joined.  The
manual contig dragging procedure can be used to change the relative
positions of contigs.  _fxref(Contig-Selector-Order, Changing the Contig
Order, contig_selector) As the contigs are dragged the plotted results
will be automatically moved to their corresponding new positions.  This
means that if users drag the contigs to move their plotted results close
to the main diagonal they will be simultaneously putting their contigs
into the correct relative positions.

_ifdef([[_gap4]],[[Because this plot can simultaneously show the results of independent
types of search, users can see if different analyses produce
corroborating evidence for the ordering of contigs.  Also, if for
example, a result
from Check Assembly lies on the same horizontal or vertical projection
as a result from Find Repeats, users can see the alternative position to
place the doubtful reading. Ie this is an indication that a reading may have
been assembled in an incorrect position.]])

By use of popup menus the plotted results can be used to invoke a subset
of commands.  For example if the user clicks the right mouse button over
a result from Find Internal Joins a menu containing Invoke Join Editor
(_fpref(Editor-Joining, The Join Editor, contig_editor)) and Invoke
Contig Editors (_fpref(Editor, Editing in __prog__, contig_editor))
will pop up. If the user selects Invoke Join Editor the Join Editor will
be started with the two contigs aligned at the match position contained
in the result. If required one of the contigs will be complemented to
allow their alignment.

_ifdef([[_gap4]],[[A typical display from the Contig Comparator is
shown below. It includes results for Find Internal Joins in black,
Find Repeats in red, Check Assembly in green, and Find Read Pairs in
blue. Notice that there are several Find Internal Joins, Find Read
Pairs and Find Repeats results close to the main diagonal near the top
left of the display, indicating that the contigs represented in that
area are likely to be in the correct relative positions to one
another.  In the middle of the bottom right quadrant there is a blue
diagonal line perpendicular to the main diagonal which indicates a
pair of contigs that are in the wrong relative orientation.]],
[[A typical display from the Contig Comparator is shown below. It
includes results for Find Internal Joins in black, Find Repeats in
red and Sequence Search in green. The currently highlighted item is
shown in pink with a summary at the bottom of the screen. The
orientation of this is from top-left to bottom-right indicating that
the match is in the same orientation within both contigs (we can see
some in the opposite orientation indicating that we need to reverse
complement either of the two contigs before attempting any joins,
although this will happen automatically).]])
The crosshairs show the positions for a pair of contigs. The vertical
line continues into the Contig Selector part of the display, and the
position represented by the horizontal line is also duplicated there.

_ifdef([[_gap4]],[[
_lpicture(comparator)
]],[[
_lpicture(gap5_comparator)
]])

_split()
@node Compar-Examining
@section Examining Results and Using Them to Select Commands
@cindex Contig Comparator: manipulating results

Moving the cursor over plotted results highlights them, and the
information line
gives a brief description of the currently highlighted match. This is in
the form:

@var{match name}: @var{contig1_number}@@@var{position_in_contig1},
with @var{contig2_number}@@@var{position_in_contig2},
@var{length_of_the_match}

For Find Internal Joins the percentage mismatch is also displayed.

Several operations can be performed on each match. Pressing the right
mouse button over a match invokes a popup menu.  This menu will contain
a set of options which depends on the type of result to which the match
corresponds. The following is a complete list, but not all will appear
for each type of result.

@table @var
@item Information
@cindex Information, in Contig Comparator
Sends a textual description of the match to the Output Window.

@cindex Hide, in Contig Comparator
@cindex Invoke contig editors, in Contig Comparator
@cindex Invoke contig join editors, in Contig Comparator
_ifdef([[_gap4]],[[@cindex Invoke template display, in Contig Comparator]])

@item Hide
Removes the match from the Contig Comparator. The match can be revealed
again by using "Reveal all" within the Results Manager.

@item Invoke contig editors
@itemx Invoke join editors
_ifdef([[_gap4]],[[@itemx Invoke template display]])

When invoked these options bring up their respective
displays to show the match in greater detail. 

@item Remove
@cindex Remove, in Contig Comparator
Removes the match from the Contig Comparator. The match
cannot be  revealed again by using "Reveal all" within the
Results Manager.
@end table

One of the items in the popup menu may have an asterisk next to it. This is
the default operation which can also be performed by double clicking the left
mouse button on the match.
For Repeat or Find Internal Joins matches this will normally be the Join
Editor, or two Contig Editors when the match is between two points in
the same contig. _ifdef([[_gap4]],[[For Read Pairs two Template Displays are shown.]])

The crosshairs can be toggled on and off and a diagonal line going from
top left to bottom right of the plot can also be displayed if required.
This is useful as a guide for moving the contigs such that their matches
lie upon the diagonal line.

The "Results" menu on the contig selector window provides a similar mechanism
of accessing results, but at the level of all matches in a particular search.
This is simply a menu driven interface to the Results Manager window
(_fpref(Results, Results Manager, __prog__)), but containing only the results
relevant to the contig comparator window.

_split()
@node Compar-AutoNavigation
@section Automatic Match Navigation
@cindex Contig comparator: auto navigation
@cindex Contig comparator: next button
@cindex Next button, in Contig comparator
@cindex Sort Matches

The "Next" button of the contig comparator window automatically invokes the
default operation on the next match from the current active result. This
provides a mechanism to step through each match in turn ensuring that no
matches have been missed.

With a single result (set of matches) plotted, the "Next" button simply steps
through each match in turn until all have been seen. Moving the mouse above
the "Next" button, without pressing it, highlights the next match and
displays brief information about it in the status line at the bottom of the
window. To step through the matches in "best first" order, select the "Sort
Matches" option from the relevant name in the Results menu. The exact order is
dependent on the result in question, but is generally arranged to be the most
interesting ones first. _ifdef([[_gap4]],[[For example, Find Internal
Joins shows the lowest mismatch first whilst Check Assembly shows the
highest mismatches first.]])

Bringing up another result now directs "Next" to step through each of the new
matches. To change the result that "Next" operates on, use the Result menu to
select the "Use for 'Next'" option in the desired result. Alternatively,
double clicking on a match also causes "Next" to process the list starting
from the selected result.

The "Next" scheme remembers any matches that have been previously examined
either by itself or by manually double clicking, and will skip these. To clear
this 'visited' information select "Reset 'Next'" in the Results Manager.

