_split()
@node Consistency-Display
@section Consistency Display
@cindex Consistency display

@menu
* Consistency-Display::     Consistency Display
* Consistency-Confidence::  Confidence Values Graph
* Consistency-ReadingCov::  Reading Coverage Histogram
* Consistency-ReadPairCov::    Read-Pair Coverage Histogram
* Consistency-StrandCov::    Strand Coverage
@end menu

The Consistency Display provides plots designed to highlight 
potential problems in contigs. It
is invoked from the main gap4 View menu by selecting any of its plots. Once
a plot has been displayed, any of the other types of consistency plot can
be displayed within the same frame from the View menu of the Consistency
Display. 

An example showing the Confidence Values Graph and the corresponding Reading
Coverage Histogram, Read-Pair Coverage Histogram and Strand Coverage is 
shown below.

_lpicture(consistency_p)

One or more contigs can be displayed and are drawn in the same order
at the input contig list (which need not necessarily be in the same order as 
the contig selector). If more than one contig is displayed, the contigs are
drawn immediately after one another but are staggered in the y direction.

The ruler ticks can be turned on or off from the View menu of the consistency
display. 

The plots can be enlarged or reduced using the standard zooming mechanism.
_fxref(UI-Graphics-Zoom, Zooming, interface)

The crosshair toggle button controls whether the crosshair is visible. This is
shown as a black vertical and horizontal line. The position of the crosshair is
shown in the 3 boxes to the right of the 
crosshair toggle. The first box indicates the cursor position in the current
contig. The second box indicates the overall position of the cursor in the 
consensus. The last box shows the y position of the crosshair. 


_split()
@node Consistency-Confidence
@subsection Confidence Values Graph
@cindex Confidence values graph

This option can be invoked from the main gap4 View menu, in which case
it appears as a single plot, or from the View menu of the Consistency Display
in which case it appear part of the Consistency Display.

The confidence values are determined from the current consensus algorithm
(_fpref(Con-Calculation, The Consensus Algorithms, t)). 

_lpicture(conf_values_p)

Please note that this plot can be very slow for long contigs. This is
caused by the large number of points (not the calculation) and we hope
to speed it up in a future release.

_split()
@node Consistency-ReadingCov
@subsection Reading Coverage Histogram
@cindex Reading coverage

This option can be invoked from the main gap4 View menu, in which case
it appears as a single plot, or from the View menu of the Consistency Display
in which case it will appear as part of the Consistency Display.

The number of readings which cover each base position along the contig
are plotted as a histogram. 

_lpicture(read_coverage_p)

As can be seen in the dialogue below, the user can select the contigs(s)
to display, and whether to plot: Forward strand only, Reverse strand
only, Both strands or the Summation of both strands. In the example
shown above both strands have been plotted: forward in red and reverse
in black.

_picture(read_coverage_d)


_split()
@node Consistency-ReadPairCov
@subsection Read-Pair Coverage Histogram
@cindex Read-pair coverage

This option can be invoked from the main gap4 View menu, in which case
it appears as a single plot, or from the View menu of the Consistency Display
in which case it will appear as part of the Consistency Display.

The number of read-pairs which cover each base position along the contig
are plotted as a histogram. 

_lpicture(readpair_coverage_p)

_split()
@node Consistency-StrandCov
@subsection Strand Coverage
@cindex strand coverage

This option can be invoked from the main gap4 View menu, in which case
it appears as a single plot, or from the View menu of the Consistency Display
in which case it will appear as part of the Consistency Display.

The display is used to show which regions of the data are covered by
readings from each of the two strands of the DNA. 
A separate line is drawn for each strand: forward in red and reverse
in black.
The function works in two complementary modes: it can plot the positions
which are covered, or the positions which are not. The latter is probably
the most useful as it directs users to the places requiring further data.

The figure below shows the covered positions, and the figure below that
shows the uncovered positions for the same contig.

_lpicture(strand_coverage_p1)
_lpicture(strand_coverage_p2)

The plot can be regarded as a coarse version of the Quality Plot
(_fpref(Template-Quality, Quality Plot, template)),
in that it shows the strand coverage using the Quality Calculation
(_fpref(Qual-Cal, The Quality Calculation, calc_consensus)),
but does not reveal problems with individual base positions.


_picture(strand_coverage_d)

The dialogue allows user to select the contig(s) and strands to analyse
and whether to plot Coverage or Problems.
