@menu
* Contig-Selector-Contigs::             Selecting contigs
* Contig-Selector-Order::               Changing the contig order
* Contig-Selector-Menus::               The menus
@end menu

The __prog__ Contig Selector is used to display, select and reorder contigs.
It can be invoked from the __prog__ View menu, but will automatically appear when
a database is opened.  In the Contig Selector all contigs are shown as
colinear horizontal lines separated by short vertical lines.  The length of
the horizontal lines is proportional to the length of the contigs and their
left to right order represents the current ordering of the contigs. This
Contig Order is stored in the gap database and users can change it by
dragging the lines representing the contigs in the display.  The Contig
Selector can also be used to select contigs for processing.

_ifdef([[_gap4]],[[Tags
(_fpref(Intro-Anno, Annotating and masking readings and contigs, __prog__)) can
also be displayed in the Contig Selector window.  As the mouse is moved over a
contig, it is highlighted and the contig name (left most reading name) and
length are displayed in the status line. The number in brackets is the contig
number.]]) _ifdef([[_gap5]],[[Unlike gap4, gap5 does not display
annotations within the Contig Selector window.]])

@cindex Contig Selector: Contig order
@cindex Contig order: Contig Selector

_ifdef([[_gap4]],[[
_picture(contig_selector)
]],[[
_picture(gap5_contig_selector)
]])

The figure shows a typical display from the Contig Selector. At the top are
the File, View and Results menus.  Below that are buttons for zooming
and for displaying the crosshair. The four boxes to the right
are used to display
the X and Y coordinates of the crosshair. The rightmost two display the Y
coordinates when the contig selector is transformed into the contig comparator
(_fpref(Contig Comparator, Contig Comparator, comparator)).
The two leftmost boxes display the X coordinates: the
leftmost is the position in the contig and the other is the position
in the overall consensus.  The crosshair is the vertical line spanning the
panel below. 

This panel shows the lines that represent the contigs and the
currently active tags. Those tags shown above the contig lines are on readings
and those below are on the consensus.  Right clicking on a tag gives a
menu containing ``information'' (to see the tag contents) and ``Edit
contig at tag'' which invokes the contig editor centred on the
selected tag.

The information line is showing data for
the contig that is currently under the crosshair.

_split()
@node Contig-Selector-Contigs
@section Selecting Contigs
@cindex Contig Selector: selecting contigs
@cindex selecting contigs: Contig Selector
@cindex naming contigs
@cindex contig naming
@cindex contigs - identifying
@cindex identifying contigs

Contigs can be selected by either clicking with the left mouse button
on the line representing the required contig in the contig selector window
or alternatively by choosing the "List contigs" option from the "View" menu. 
This option invokes a "Contig List" list box where the contig names and 
numbers are listed in the same order as they appear in the contig selector 
window. 

_picture(contig_list_box)

Within this list box the contig names can be sorted 
alphabetically on contig name or numerically on contig number. This is done 
by selecting the corresponding item from the sort 
menu at the top of the list box. Clicking on a name within the list box is 
equivalent to clicking on the corresponding contig in the contig selector.
More than one contig can be selected by dragging out a region with the left
mouse button. Dragging the mouse off the bottom of the list will scroll it to
allow selection of a range larger than the displayed section of the
list.  When the left button is pressed any existing selection is
cleared. To select several disjoint entries in the list press control
and the left mouse button.  The ``Copy'' button copies the current
selection to the paste buffer.

_ifdef([[_gap4]],[[Most commands require a contig identifier (which can be the name or
number of any reading on the contig) and __prog__ contains several
mechanisms for obtaining this information from users.  The names or
numbers can be typed or cut and pasted into dialogue boxes (note that a
reading number must be preceded by a # character, e.g.  "#102" means
reading number 102 but "102" means the reading with name
102).]],[[Most commands require a contig identifier, which can be the
contig name itself or the name/number of any reading within that
contig. __Prog__ always knows reading record numbers, but depending on
the options used in tg_index when creating the assembly database the
reading names may not be indexed. To specify a reading by record
number, precede it by a # character, e.g. ``#10000'' means
reading record number 10000, but ``10000'' means the contig or reading
with name 10000.]])

Also any
currently active dialogue boxes that require a contig to be selected can
be updated simply by clicking on a contig in the contig selector or clicking
on an entry in the "Contig Names" list box.  For
example, if the Edit contig command is selected from the Edit menu it
will bring up a dialogue requesting the identity of the contig to edit.
If the user clicks the left mouse button on a contig in the contig
selector window, the contig editor dialogue will automatically change to
contain the name of the selected contig.  Some commands, such as the
Contig Editor, can be selected from a popup menu that is activated by
clicking the right mouse button on the contig line in the Contig
Selector or clicking the right mouse button on the corresponding name within
the "Contig List" list box. This simultaneously defines the contig to 
operate on and so the command starts up without dialogue.

Several contigs can be selected at once by either clicking on each
contig with the left mouse button or dragging out a selection rectangle
by holding the left mouse button down. Contigs which are entirely
enclosed within the rectangle will be selected. Alternatively, selecting
several contigs from the "Contig Names" list box will also result in each
contig being selected. Selected contigs are highlighted in bold. Selecting
the same contig again will unselect it.

The currently selected contigs are also kept in a 'list' named contigs.

_split()
@node Contig-Selector-Order
@section Changing the Contig Order
@cindex Contig Selector: changing the contig order
@cindex Contig Selector: saving the contig order

The order of contigs is shown by the order of the lines representing
them within the Contig Selector. The order of contigs can be changed by
moving these lines using the middle mouse button, or Alt left mouse
button.  Several contigs may
be moved at once by selecting several contigs using the above method.
After selection, move the contigs with the middle mouse button, or Alt
left mouse button, and
position the mouse cursor where you want the selection to be moved to.
Upon release of the mouse button the contigs will be shuffled to reflect
their new order. The separator line at the point the contig was moved
from increases in height.

The contig order is saved automatically whenever a contig is created or
removed (eg auto assemble), including operations like disassemble which
temporarily create contigs. The order can be saved manually using the
Save Contig Order option on the File menu.

_split()
@node Contig-Selector-Menus
@section The Contig Selector Menus
@cindex Contig Selector: menus
@cindex File menu: Contig Selector
@cindex View menu: Contig Selector
@cindex Results menu: Contig Selector

The File menu contains only one command; "Exit". This simply quits the contig
selector display.

The View menu gives access to the Results Manager (_fpref(Results,
Results Manager, results)), allows contigs to be selected using a list box
containing the contig names 
(_oxref(Contig-Selector-Contigs, Selecting Contigs)),
_ifdef([[_gap4]],[[allows active tags (_fpref(Conf-Tag, TagSelector, configure)) to be selected, ]])and the list of selected contigs to be cleared. 

The Results menu is updated on the fly to contain cascading menus for each of
the plots shown when the contig selector is in its 2D 
Contig Comparator mode
(_fpref(Contig Comparator, Contig Comparator, comparator)).
The contents of these cascading menus are identical to
the pulldown menus available from within the Results Manager.
