@cindex Search from file
@cindex Contig navigation
@cindex Contig region


This function, which can be found under the view menu,
allows the user to navigate to areas of interest within 
contigs.
When Contig navigation is selected a dialog box is raised
asking for a filename containing the regions. The format is
the same as the search by file function.
_fxref(Editor-Search-File,Search by file,contig_editor)

_picture(contig_navigation_browse)

The user can either enter the name of the file or browse
for it using the browse button. Once ok is hit, the file is 
loaded into a table for viewing.

_picture(contig_navigation_table)

The table has three fixed headers, contigID, Position and Problem
Type. Clicking on any of these cause the whole table to be sorted on
that column.  The regions can be viewed by either randomly double
clicking on a row , by selecting a row and using the next (->>) and
previous (<<-) buttons at the bottom, or by pressing the Page Up and
Page Down keys.  The corresponding contig editor will be opened and
moved to the position indicated.  Once a row has been clicked on it's
background will be changed to highlight that it has been visited.

The reset button will clear the table and re-read the data from 
file.
Auto-close editors is set on by default. It closes any un-needed 
editors when the user selects a region on a different contig. 
The Show Traces mode will automatically display some traces based on
the same mechanisms used in the editors 'Auto-display Traces' option
(_fpref(Editor-Trace Display, Trace Display Settings, contig_editor)).
Save will save the table list, including all rows previously marked
as selected, back to the file. If this file is re-read at a later stage
then the table will have the same sort order and tagging as when saved. 

The format of the input file is as follows:

@i{contig_identifier} @i{position} @i{comment}

If the comment contains ``@code{To:}'' and a number then the region
indicator at the bottom of the navigator window updates to show the
size of the element, otherwise it just has a line showing the position
of the start. Finally the comment may end in the 'nul' character to
indicate that it has already been visited. (This is utilised by the
Save command.)
