@cindex Convert program
@cindex Bap databases: conversion to gap4
@cindex Dap databases: conversion to bap or gap4

@menu
* Conv-Program::        The conversion program
* Conv-Example::        Example
@end menu

gap4 is the current program in a rather long line of sequence
assembly programs that have been distributed as part of the "Staden"
Package. Each of these earlier programs used different types of file to
store assembly data. These old files are incompatible with gap4, but the
package contain a program (convert) to convert them to gap4 databases.
It is possible to convert from:

@itemize @bullet
@item plain text file (created by convert)
@item dap database
@item bap database
@end itemize

to any of the following formats
@itemize @bullet
@item plain text file (created by convert)
@item bap database
@item gap4 database
@end itemize

@node Conv-Program
@section The Conversion Program

The program takes no command line arguments and has a scrolling text
style of interface. Users are prompted
for the format, name and version of the database to convert.
If the source is an xdap or xbap database, ensure that the name and
version are in uppercase. 
If the source is a text file, the version is
requested but ignored! Next users are prompted for the
format, name and version of the database to create. Ensure
that names and versions are in the appropriate case and that the files
do already exist.

Then the program converts the database (which may take some
time) and writes out a message to signify that
the conversion has successfully completed.

@node Conv-Example
@section Example
@cindex Convert program example

Here is a log of a typical conversion session. User input is shown in
bold.

@example
Covert Project Database
Version 1.3, 4th December 1995
Please enter database to convert:

Available types are:
0. Flat file - created with this program
1. xdap database
2. xbap database

Database type? @b{2}
Database name? @b{ZK643}
Database version? @b{0}

Please enter database to create:

Available types are:
0. Flat file - created with this program
1. xbap database
2. xgap database

Database type? @b{2}
Database name? @b{ZK643}
Database version? @b{1}

Conversion completed
@end example
