@cindex eba: man page
@unnumberedsec NAME

eba --- Estimates Base Accuracy in an SCF or ZTR file

@unnumberedsec SYNOPSIS

@code{eba} [@i{trace_file}]

@unnumberedsec DESCRIPTION

@code{Eba} will calculate numerical estimates of base accuracy for each
base in an SCF or ZTR file. The figures calculated should not be considered as
reliable and better values can be obtained from phred or ATQA.

The method employed by eba to estimate the base accuracies performs the
following calculation for each base. Calculate the area under the peaks
for each base type. Divide the area under the called base by the largest
area under the other three bases. From the 2002 release these values are
normalised to the phred scale (this was achieved by comaring the
original eba values and phred values for 4.6 million base calls of
Sanger Centre data).

With no filename as an argument eba reads from standard input and writes
to standard output. This enables eba to be used as a filter, or to
estimate base accuracies for unwritable files. If a file is specified on
the command line then the accuracy figures will be written to this file.

@unnumberedsec EXAMPLES

To write base accuracy figures to an SCF file named @code{e04f10.s1SCF}.

@example
@code{eba e04f10.s1SCF}
@end example

To write base accuracy figures on the original eba scale to an SCF file 
named @code{e04f10.s1SCF}.

@example
@code{eba -old_scale e04f10.s1SCF}
@end example

To write base accuracy figures to a ZTR file named @code{e04f10.s1.ztr}
in another users directory, and to store the updated file in the
current directory:

@example
@code{eba < ~user/e04f10.s1.ztr > e04f10.s1.ztr}
@end example

@unnumberedsec SEE ALSO

_fxref(Formats-Scf, scf(4), formats)
