@ignore
@c MANSECTION=4
@unnumberedsec NAME

ExperimentFile --- Experiment File Format
@end ignore

@node Formats-Exp
@section Experiment File
@cindex Experiment files

Experiment files contain gel readings plus information about them, and are
used during the processing of the sequence. They are used to carry data
between programs: they provide input to the programs and programs may in
turn add to or modify them. When the experiment file for a reading reaches
the assembly program it should be carrying all the data needed for its
subsequent processing. The assembly program will copy what it needs into
the assembly database. The file format is based on that of EMBL sequence
entries and, if required, can be read as such by programs like spin.

@menu
* Exp-Records::                 Records
* Exp-Explain::                 Explanation of Records
* Exp-Example::                 Example Experiment File
* Exp-Unsupported::             Unsupported Additions
@end menu

_split()
@node Exp-Records
@subsection Records
@cindex Experiment files: record types
@cindex Records in experiment files

It is important to note that the assembly program gap4
(_fpref(Gap4-Introduction, Gap4 introduction, gap4))
 will not operate to
its full effect if it is not given all the necessary data. For example
gap4 contains many functions that can analyse the positions and relative
orientations of readings from the same template in order to check the
correctness of the assembly and determine the contig order. However if
the records that name templates and their estimated lengths, and define
the primers used to obtain readings from them are missing, none of these
valuable analyses can be performed reliably. One way to ensure that all
the necessary fields are present is to use the program pregap4
(_fpref(Pregap4-Introduction, Pregap4 introduction, pregap4)).


In the descriptions below records containing * are those read into the
database during normal assembly; those with ** are extra items required when
entering pre-assembled data; those with *** are read from SCF files
(after the experiment file has been read to obtain the SCF file name);
(_fpref(Formats-Scf, SCF introduction, scf))
the record marked **** is an extra item required for Directed Assembly.

The order of records in the file is not important. They are listed
here in alphabetical order with, where possible, reasons for the 
origin of their names. Several are redundant and no group is likely
to make use of them all. Obviously others can be added in the future.
Initially they might be of local use but if their use becomes wider they
can be added to the standard set. Standard EMBL records such as FT are
assumed to be included.


@c TABLE_MODE=1
@table @var
@item AC
ACcession number
@item AP
Assembly Position ****
@item AQ
AVerage Quality for bases 100..200
@item AV
Accuracy values for externally assembled data **, ***
@item BC
Base Calling software
@item CC
Comment line
@item CF
Cloning vector sequence File
@item CH
Special CHemistry
@item CL
Cloning vector Left end
@item CN
Clone Name
@item CR
Cloning vector Right end
@item CS
Cloning vector Sequence present in sequence *
@item CV
Cloning Vector type
@item DR
Direction of Read
@item DT
DaTe of experiment
@item EN
Entry Name
@item EX
EXperimental notes
@item FM
sequencing vector Fragmentation Method
@item ID
IDentifier *
@item LE
was Library Entry, but now identifies a well in a micro titre dish
@item LI
was subclone LIbrary but now identifies a micro titre dish
@item LN
Local format trace file Name *
@item LT
Local format trace file Type *
@item MC
MaChine on which experiment ran
@item MN
Machine generated trace file Name
@item MT
Machine generated trace file Type
@item ON
Original base Numbers (positions) **
@item OP
OPerator
@item PC
Position in Contig **
@item PD
Primer data (the sequence of a primer)
@item PN
Primer Name
@item PR
PRimer type *
@item PS
Processing Status
@item QL
poor Quality sequence present at Left (5') end *
@item QR
poor Quality sequence present at Right (3') end *
@item RS
Reference Sequence for numbering and mutation detection
@item SC
Sequencing vector Cloning site
@item SE
SEnse (ie whether complemented) **
@item SF
Sequencing vector sequence File
@item SI
Sequencing vector Insertion length *
@item SL
Sequencing vector sequence present at Left (5') end *
@item SP
Sequencing vector Primer site (relative to cloning site)
@item SQ
SeQuence *
@item SR
Sequencing vector sequence present at Right (3') end *
@item SS
Screening Sequence
@item ST
STrands *
@item SV
Sequencing Vector type *
@item TG
Gel reading Tag *
@item TC
Contig Tag *
@item TN
Template Name *
@item WT
Wild type trace
@end table
@c TABLE_MODE=0

_split()
@node Exp-Explain
@subsection Explanation of Records
@cindex Experiment file: explanation of records

@c TABLE_MODE=2
@cindex AC: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
AC, ACcession line
@item Format
AC   string
@item Explanation
A unique identifier for the reading.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex AP: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
AP, Assembly Position
@item Format
AP   Name_of_anchor_reading sense offset tolerance
@item Explanation
For readings whose position has been mapped by an external program, these
records tell the "directed assembly" algorithm where to assemble the data.
Positions are defined as offsets from an "anchor reading" which is the name of
any reading already in the database, an orientation (sense, + or -), and a
tolerance. Readings are aligned at relative position offset + or - tolerance.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex AQ: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
AQ, Average Quality of the reading.
@item Format
AQ   Numeric value in range 1 - 99.
@item Explanation
The average value of the "numerical estimate of base calling accuracy" as
calculated by program eba. The value is useful for monitoring data quality and
could also be used for deciding on an order of assembly - for example assemble
the highest quality readings first.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex AV: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
AV, Accuracy Values
@item Format
AV   q1 q2 q3 @dots{} or a1,c1,g1,t1 a2,c2,g2,t2 @dots{}
@item Explanation
The accuracy values lie in the range 1-99. Either 1 per base (eg 89 50 @dots{}
or 4 per base (eg 0,89,5,2 50,3,7,10). @cite{Bonfield,J.K and Staden,R.
The application of numerical estimates of base calling accuracy to DNA
sequencing projects. Nucleic Acids Res. 23 1406-1410, (1995)}.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex BC: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
BC, Base Calling software
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex CC: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
CC, Comment line
@item Format
CC   string
@item Explanation
Any comments can be added on any number of lines.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex CF: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
CF, Cloning vector sequence File
@item Format
CF   string
@item Explanation
The name of the file containing the sequence of the cloning vector, to be used
by vector_clip (_fpref(Vector_Clip, Screening Against Vector Sequences, vector_clip)).

@end table
@sp 2
@cindex CH: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
CH, Special CHemistry
@item Format
CH   number
@item Explanation
Used to flag readings as having been sequenced using a "special chemistry". The
number is a bit pattern with a bit for each chemistry type, thus allowing
combinations of chemistries to be listed. Currently bit 0 is used to
distinguish between dye-primer (0) and dye-terminator (1) chemistries. Bits 1
to 4 inclusive indicate the type of chemistry: unknown (0, 0000), ABI
Rhodamine (1, 0001), ABI dRhodamine (2, 0010), BigDye (3, 0011), Energy
Transfer (4, 0100) and LiCor (5, 0101). So for example a BigDye Terminator has 
bits 00111 set which is 7 in decimal.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex CL: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
CL, Cloning vector Left end
@item Format
CL   number
@item Explanation
The base position in the sequence that contains the last base in the cloning
vector. Currently gap4 only uses the CS line.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex CN: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
CN, Clone Name
@item Format
CN   string
@item Explanation
The name of the segment of DNA that the reading has been
derived from. Typically the name of a physical map clone. 
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex CR: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
CR, Cloning vector Right end
@item Format
CR   number
@item Explanation
The base position in the sequence that contains the first base in the cloning
vector. Currently gap4 only uses the CS line.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex CS: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
CS, Cloning vector Sequence present in sequence
@item Format
CS   range
@item Explanation
Regions of sequence found by vector_clip 
(_fpref(Vector_Clip, Screening Against Vector Sequences,
vector_clip)) to be cloning vector. Used in assembly to
exclude unwanted sequence.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex CV: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
CV, Cloning Vector type
@item Format
CV   string
@item Explanation
The type of the cloning vector used.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex DR: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
DR, Direction of Read
@item Format
DR   direction
@item Explanation
Whether forward or reverse primers were used. Allows
mapping of forward and reverse reads off the same template. NOTE however
that we do not encourage the use of this method as the terms
direction, sense and strand can be confusing. Instead we encourage the
use of the PRimer line.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex DT: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
DT, DaTe of experiment
@item Format
DT   dd-mon-yyyy
@item Explanation
Any date information.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex EN: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
EN, Entry Name
@item Format
EN   string
@item Explanation
The name given to the reading
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex EX: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
EX, EXperimental notes
@item Format
EX   string
@item Explanation
Another type of comment line for additional information.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex FM: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
FM, sequencing vector Fragmentation Method
@item Format
FM   string
@item Explanation
Fragmentation method used to create sequencing library.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex ID: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
ID, IDentifier
@item Format
ID   string
@item Explanation
This is the name given to the reading inside the assembly database
and is equivalent to the ID line of an EMBL entry.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex LE: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
LE, Can be used to identify the location of materials
@item Format
LE   string
@item Explanation
Originally a micro titre dish well number. Used in
combination with LI.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex LI: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
LI, Can be used to identify the location of materials
@item Format
LI   string
@item Explanation
Originally a micro titre dish identifier. Used in
combination with LE.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex LN: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
LN, Local format trace file Name
@item Format
LN   string
@item Explanation
The name of the local format trace file. This information is passed
onto gap4, and allows for local formats to be used.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex LT: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
LT, Local format trace file Type
@item Format
LT   string
@item Explanation
The type of the local trace file type (usually SCF).
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex MC: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
MC, MaChine on which sequencing experiment was run
@item Format
MC   string
@item Explanation
The lab's name for the sequencing machine used to create the data.
Used for logging the performance of individual machines.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex MN: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
MN, Machine generated trace file Name
@item Format
MN   string
@item Explanation
The name of the trace file generated by the sequencing machine MC.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex MT: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
MT, Machine generated trace file Type
@item Format
MT   string
@item Explanation
The type of machine generated trace file.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex ON: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
ON, Original base Numbers (positions)
@item Format
ON   (eg) 1..43 0 45..63 65..74 0 75..536
@item Explanation
The A..B notation means that values A to B inclusive, so this example reads
that bases 1 to 43 are unchanged, there is a change at 44, etc.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex OP: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
OP, OPerator
@item Format
OP   string
@item Explanation
Someone's name, possibly the person who ran the
sequencing machine. Useful, with expansion of the string field for
monitoring the performance of individuals!
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex PC: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
PC,  Position in Contig
@item Format
PC    number
@item Explanation
For preassembled data, the position to put the left end of the reading.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex PD: primer data - the sequence of a primer
@table @code
@item Record
PD,  Primer Data
@item Format
PD    sequence
@item Explanation
The primer sequence.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex PN: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
PN, Primer Name
@item Format
PN   string
@item Explanation
Name of primer used, using local naming convention. Could be a
universal primer. 
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex PR: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
PR, PRimer type
@item Format
PR   number
@item Explanation
This record shows the direction of the reading and distinguishes between
primers from the ends of the insert and those that are internal. It is
important for the analysis of the relative orientations and positions of
readings on templates. When the positions of readings on templates are
analysed (_fpref(Read Pairs, Find read pairs, read_pairs)) primer types
1,2,3 and 4 are represented using the symbols F,R,f and r respectively.

@c TABLE_MODE=1
@table @var
@item 0
Unknown
@item 1
Forward from beginning of insert
@item 2
Reverse from end of insert
@item 3
Custom forward i.e. a forward primer other than type 1.
@item 4
Custom reverse i.e. a reverse primer other than type 2.
@end table
@c TABLE_MODE=2
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex PS: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
PS, Processing Status
@item Format
PS   explanation
@item Explanation
Indication of processing status. 
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex QL: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
QL, poor Quality sequence present at Left (5') end
@item Format
QL   position
@item Explanation
The sequence up to and including the base at the marked position are
considered to be of too poor quality to be used. 
It may overlap with other marked
sequences - CS, SL or SR. Used in assembly to exclude unwanted sequence.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex QR: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
QR, poor Quality sequence present at Right (3') end
@item Format
QR   position
@item Explanation
The sequence from and including the base at the marked position to the
end is considered to be of too poor quality to be used. It may overlap with
other marked sequences - CS, SL or SR. Used in assembly to exclude
unwanted sequence.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex RS: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
RS, Reference Sequence
@item Format
RS   string
@item Explanation
The name of a sequence, usually in EMBL format, used to define the target
sequence, base numbering 
and feature table data for a project. Used to define the numbering and
changes produced by mutations in individual sequence readings
(_fpref(Mutation-Detection-Introduction, Introduction to mutation detection,t)).
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex SC: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
SC, Sequencing vector Cloning site
@item Format
SC   position
@item Explanation
The cloning site of the sequence vector. Used by vector_clip 
(_fpref(Vector_Clip, Screening Against Vector Sequences, vector_clip)).
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex SE: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
SE, SEnse (ie whether complemented)
@item Format
SE   number
@item Explanation
For preassembled data, the sense of the reading (0 for forward, 1 for
reverse).
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex SF: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
SF, Sequencing vector sequence File
@item Format
SF   string
@item Explanation
The name of the file containing the sequence of the 
sequencing vector, to be used by vector_clip 
(_fpref(Vector_Clip, Screening Against Vector Sequences, vector_clip)).
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex SI: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
SI, Sequencing vector Insertion length
@item Format
SI   range
@item Explanation
Expected insertion length of sequence in sequencing
vector. Useful for selecting templates for further experiments.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex SL: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
SL, Sequencing vector sequence present at Left (5') end
@item Format
SL   position
@item Explanation
The sequence up to and including the base at the marked 
position are considered to be sequencing vector. Written by vector_clip
(_fpref(Vector_Clip, Screening Against Vector Sequences, vector_clip)).
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex SP: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
SP, Sequencing vector Primer site (relative to cloning site)
@item Format
SP   position
@item Explanation
Location of the primer using to sequence relative to cloning site.
Used by vector_clip 
(_fpref(Vector_Clip, Screening Against Vector Sequences, vector_clip)).
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex SQ: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
SQ, SeQuence
@item Format
SQ   \nsequence blocks@dots{}\n//\n
@item Explanation
Complete sequence, as determined by the sequencing machine. The sequence is
broken into blocks of 10 bases with 6 blocks per line separated by a space
(see the example below).
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex SR: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
SR, Sequencing vector sequence present at Right (3') end
@item Format
SR   position
@item Explanation
The sequence from and including the base at the marked 
position to the end are considered to be sequencing vector. Written by
vector_clip 
(_fpref(Vector_Clip, Screening Against Vector Sequences, vector_clip)).
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex SS: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
SS, Screening Sequence
@item Format
SS   string
@item Explanation
Note that in earlier versions of this documentation this field was explained
incorrectly. Due to this the field is not currently being used by any of our
programs. The original meaning was to specify a sequence to screen against.
Any number of SS lines could be present to denote any number of screening
sequences. In the future we may change the meaning of this field to be a
single SS line containing a file of filenames of screening sequences. If this
causes problems for people then we will choose a new line type, so please
inform us now. Also note that contrary to previous documentation, vector_clip does
not use this field (it uses the SF field instead).
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex ST: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
ST, STrands
@item Format
ST   number
@item Explanation
Denotes whether this is a single or double stranded template. This
is useful for deducing suitable templates for later experiments.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex SV: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
SV, Sequencing Vector type
@item Format
SV   string
@item Explanation
Type of sequencing vector used. Can be used for choosing
templates for custom primer experiments.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex TG: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
TC, Tag to be placed on the Consensus.
@item Format
TC   TYPE S position..length
@item Explanation
These lines instruct gap4 to place tags on the consensus.
The format defines the tag type which is a 4 character identifier
and should start at column position 5), its strand  ( "+", "-" or
"=" which means both strands), its start position followed by the
position of its end. These two values are separated by "..". Following
lines starting TG with space characters up to column 10 are written
into the comment field of the tag. For example the next three lines
define a tag of type comment that is to be on both strands over the
range 100 to 110 and the comment field will contain "This comment
contains several lines".
@example
TC   COMM = 100..110
TC        This comment contains
TC          several lines
@end example
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex TC: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
TG, Tag to be placed on the reading.
@item Format
TG   TYPE S position..length
@item Explanation
These lines instruct gap4 to place tags on the reading.
See TC for further information.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex TN: experiment file line type
@table @code
@item Record
TN, Template Name
@item Format
TN   string
@item Explanation
The name of the template used in the experiment.
@end table
@sp 2
@cindex WT: wild type trace file
@table @code
@item Record
WT, Wild Type trace file
@item Format
WT   string
@item Explanation
The filename of the wild type trace file. Used for mutation studies.
@end table
@c TABLE_MODE=0

_split()
@node Exp-Example
@subsection Example
@cindex Experiment file: example
@cindex Example experiment file

@example
ID   h4a01h6.s1
EN   h4a01h6.s1
TN   h4a01h6
EX   lane 18, run time 10 hrs
MN   Sample 18
MC   A
MT   ABI
LN   h4a01h6.s1SCF
LT   SCF
DT   08-Jan-1993
OP   ak
TN   h4a01h6
SV   M13mp18
SF   /pubseq/seqlibs/vectors/m13mp18.seq
SI   1000..2000
SC   6249
PN   -21
PR   1
DR   +
SP   41
ST   1
CN   3G9
CV   sCos-1
CF   /pubseq/seqlibs/vectors/sCos-1.seq
SS   /pubseq/seqlibs/vectors/m13mp18.seq
SQ
     GCTTGCATGC CTGCAGGTCG ACTCTAGAGG ATCCCCAACC AGTAAGGCAA CCCCGCCAGC
     CTAGCCGGGT CCTCAACGAC AGGAGCACGA TCATGCGCAC CCGTCAGATC CAGACATGAT
     AAGATACATT GATGAGTTTG GACAAACCAC AACTAGAATG CAGT-AAAAA AATGCTTTAT
     TTGTGAAATT TGTGATGCTA TTGCTTTATT TGTAACCATT ATAAGCTGCA ATAAACAAGT
     TAACAACAAC AATTGCATTC ATTTTATGTT TCAGGTTCAG GGGGAGGTGT GGGAGGTTTT
     TTAAAGCAAG TAAAACCTCT ACAAATGTGG TATGGCTGAT TATGATCTCT AGTCAAGGCA
     CTATACATCA AATATT-CCT TATTAACCCC CTTTACAAAT TTAAAAGGCT -AAAGGGTCC
     ACAATTTTTG -GCCTAGGTA TTAATAGCCG GCACTTCTT- TGCCTGTTTT GG-GTAGGG-
     AAAACCGGTA TGTTT-TGGT T-TTC
//
QL   0
QR   281
SL   36
SR   506
CS   37..280
PS   Completely cloning vector
@end example

_split()
@node Exp-Unsupported
@subsection Unsupported Additions (From LaDeana Hillier)
@cindex Experiment file: unsupported additions

Note the clash on AP which the io-lib uses for "Assembly Position"
and PC which is used for "Position in Contig"

@c INDENT=0.1i
@example
People to track:
TP Template Prep person
QP Sequencer Person, person who does sequencing reactions
LP Loader Person
AL Agar Loader person (when they run a gel to determine SI)
AP Agar reaction Person   (person who does the reactions to prepare
                        the template to be run on a gel)

Gel specific information
GN Gel Name
GL Gel Lane
GP Gel Pourer person
AG Agar Gel name (sizing gel)
AF Agar Fate, no insert, no bands, what else?

Name of library
LB  Library name, probably not critical to assembly even though
        one CN may have more than one library.  But it is important
        to the cDNA project although I could put it in CN, since
        the cDNA project wouldn't have a CN otherwise.

Processing information
PC processing comment (a comment about PS)
        I think PS should just hold pass or fail and PC should hold
        additional information about why things passed.

Trace information gotten from the ABI machine (from info field in SCF file):
TS   Trace Spacing
DP   Dye Primer
HA   signal strengtH A
HG   signal strengtH G
HC   signal strengtH C
HT   signal strengtH T

(NOTE rs suggested these should go in a single record

PP   Primer Position  (position at which primer peak was detected in trace)

Stuff most likely specific to the cDNA project:
MP Map Position 
TT Tissue Type of the library
EI dbEst Id  
ER dbEst Remark
OE Other Est's which are similar
NI NCBI ID
GB GenBank accession number
SD Submission Date (when est was submitted)
UD Update date (when it was last updated)
CI citation associated with this cDNA
@end example
@c INDENT=0.5i
