@cindex extract_fastq: man page
@unnumberedsec NAME

extract_fastq --- extracts sequence and quality from a trace or experiment file.

@unnumberedsec SYNOPSIS

@code{extract_fastq}
[@code{-}(@code{abi}|@code{alf}|@code{scf}|@code{ztr}|@code{exp}|@code{pln})]
[@code{-good_only}] [@code{-clip_cosmid}] [@code{-fasta_out}]
[@code{-output} @i{output_name}] [@i{input_name}] @code{...}

@unnumberedsec DESCRIPTION

@code{extract_fastq} extracts the sequence and quality information
from binary trace files or Experiment files. The input can be read
either from standard input or read from files listed directly as
arguments or contained within a ``file of filenames''. Output is
either sent to standard output or a named file. It contains the
sequence and confidence stored in single-line fastq format.

@unnumberedsec OPTIONS

@table @asis
@item @code{-abi}, @code{-alf}, @code{-scf}, @code{-ztr}, @code{-exp}, @code{-pln}
    Specify an input file format. This is not usually required as
    @code{extract_seq} will automatically determine the correct input file
    type. This option is supplied incase the automatic determination is
    incorrect (which is possible, but has never been observed).

@item @code{-output} @i{file}
    The sequence will be written to @i{file} instead of standard
    output.

@item @code{-fofn} @i{file_of_filenames}
    Read the reading names from @i{file_of_filenames} with one per line.
@end table

@unnumberedsec SEE ALSO

_fxref(Formats-Exp, ExperimentFile(4), formats)
_fxref(Formats-Scf, scf(4), formats)
_fxref(Man-extract_seq extract_seq(1), extract_seq.1)
@code{Read}(4)
