@cindex extract_seq: man page
@unnumberedsec NAME

extract_seq --- extracts sequence from a trace or experiment file.

@unnumberedsec SYNOPSIS

@code{extract_seq} [@code{-r}]
[@code{-}(@code{abi}|@code{alf}|@code{scf}|@code{ztr}|@code{exp}|@code{pln})]
[@code{-good_only}] [@code{-clip_cosmid}] [@code{-fasta_out}]
[@code{-output} @i{output_name}] [@i{input_name}] @code{...}

@unnumberedsec DESCRIPTION

@code{extract_seq} extracts the sequence information from binary trace
files, Experiment files, or from the old Staden format plain files. The input
can be read either from files or from standard input, and the output can be
written to either a file or standard output. Multiple input files can be
specified. The output contains the sequences split onto lines of at most 60
characters each.

@unnumberedsec OPTIONS

@table @asis
@item @code{-r}
    Directs reading of experiment file to attempt extraction of sequence from
    the referenced (@code{LN} and @code{LT} line types) trace file. Without
    this option, or when the trace file cannot be found, the sequence
    output is that listed in the Experiment File. This option has no effect
    for other input format types.

@item @code{-abi}, @code{-alf}, @code{-scf}, @code{-ztr}, @code{-exp}, @code{-pln}
    Specify an input file format. This is not usually required as
    @code{extract_seq} will automatically determine the correct input file
    type. This option is supplied incase the automatic determination is
    incorrect (which is possible, but has never been observed).

@item @code{-good_only}
    When reading an experiment file or SCF file containing clip marks, output
    only the @i{good} sequence which is contained within the boundaries marked
    by the @code{QL}, @code{QR}, @code{SL}, @code{SR}, @code{CL}, @code{CR}
    and @code{CS} line types.

@item @code{-clip_cosmid}
    When the @code{-good_only} argument is specified this controls whether the
    cosmid sequence should be considered good data. Without this argument
    cosmid sequence is considered good.

@item @code{-fasta_out}
    Specifies that the output should be in fasta format

@item @code{-output} @i{file}
    The sequence will be written to @i{file} instead of standard
    output.
@end table

@unnumberedsec SEE ALSO

_fxref(Formats-Exp, ExperimentFile(4), formats)
_fxref(Formats-Scf, scf(4), formats)
_fxref(Man-extract_fastq extract_fastq(1), extract_fastq.1)
@code{Read}(4)
