This function 
(which is available from the gap4 File menu)
is used to produce copies of readings stored in the assembly
database. The readings, and information about them, are written to disk in
experiment file format (_fpref(Formats-Exp, Experiment file format, exp)) and
will include any edits made and tags created. They are written in their
original orientation. No change is made to the copies in the assembly
database: this process creates copies and should not be confused with
"Disassemble readings".  _fxref(Disassemble, Disassemble Readings,
disassembly) The names of the readings to extract can be read from a list or a
file of file names.  Clicking on the browse button will invoke an appropriate
browser dialogue. If just a single reading is to be assembled choose "single"
and enter the filename instead of the file or list of filenames.  The files
are written into the "Destination directory" with their original file names.

_picture(extract)

If required, the files will include additional information suitable for
processing by either "Enter pre-assembled data" or "Directed assembly"
(_fpref(Exp-Records, Experiment file format explained, exp)).  Both contain
the ON and AV Experiment File records. Pre-assembled data also contains SE and
PC records whilst Directed assembly contains AP records.  It is recommended
that Directed Assembly format is always used in preference to the Preassemble
format.

@cindex Merging databases
@cindex Splitting databases
@cindex Database merging
@cindex Database splitting

To merge databases use the "Directed assembly" format to output the contigs
required. Then, within the database you wish to merge the data use the Directed
Assembly (_fpref(Assembly-Directed, Directed Assembly, assembly)) command. By
using Directed Assembly with new blank databases it is also possible to create
database subsets or to split databases.
