@cindex File browser
@menu
@ifset html
* FB-Introduction::             Introduction
@end ifset
* FB-DirFiles::                 Directories and files
* FB-Filter::                   Filters
@ifset standalone
* Index::			Index
@end ifset
@end menu

_split()
@ifset html
@node FB-Introduction
@unnumberedsubsec Introduction
@end ifset
@cindex File browser: introduction

The file browser is a dialogue that allows the user to select 
files from any directory. It is typically used when choosing a file for a
particular action, such as opening a database in gap or saving a
trace file in trev. The precise details of the layout may change
depending on this context. In some circumstances, such as loading sequences into spin 
several files may be selected (in which case the dialogue will be titled
"Open multiple files"), in others only a single file can be selected.
The illustration below shows the file browser
as displayed when opening files from within trev. The
@samp{Formats} and @samp{Filter} section here are used to select
different file types. These dialogue components may not appear in all
file browsers.

_picture(filebrowser)

The @samp{OK}, @samp{Filter} and @samp{Cancel} buttons perform their usual
tasks; @samp{OK} accepts the file currently shown in the selection component,
and @samp{Cancel} quits the dialogue.

_split()
@node FB-DirFiles
@subsection Directories and Files
@cindex Directories: file browser
@cindex Files: file browser
@cindex File browser: directories
@cindex File browser: files

The main component of the file browser dialogue consists of two scroll
lists placed side by side. The left list is labelled "Directory" and
shows a list of other directories to choose from. The right list is the
list of files in the currently displayed directory.

Double clicking with the left mouse button on a directory updates the
file list. If a filter file browser component is visible then the
current directory will be displayed as the start of the filter. The
directory named ".." is the parent directory of the current directory.

Single clicking on a file name updates the Selection component. Double
clicking on a file name chooses this file and removes the dialogue. That
is, it is equivalent to single clicking on the file to update the
selection followed by pressing the @samp{OK} button. 

When the dialogue
allows multiple files to be selected (then titled "Open multiple files")
holding down the Ctrl key will retain items already chosen.

@node FB-Filter
@subsection Filters
@cindex File browser: filters
@cindex Filters: file browser

The top component of the file browser shown in the introduction
contained a Filter component. This consists of a text entry window
containing a string of the form @i{directory_name}/@i{file_pattern}.

Some dialogues may not have a Filter component. In these cases the
@i{file_pattern} is taken to be "@code{*}". Hence all files will be listed.
The @i{directory_name} is the directory that the current list of files
are contained within. The @i{file_pattern} is used to specify which of
the files within this directory should be listed in the file list. The
pattern uses the same form as UNIX shell wild card matching. To
summarise this see the following table of simple examples.

@table @code
@item *
Every filename
@item xb*
Every filename starting in "xb"
@item a*b
Every filename starting with "a" and ending with "b"
@item a?b
Every three letter filename with "a" as the first letter and "b" as the
last letter.
@item *scf
Every filename ending in "scf"
@item *[sS]cf
Every filename ending with "scf" or "Scf".
@item *@{scf,SCF@}
Every filename ending with "scf" or "SCF".
@end table

@cindex File browser: formats
@cindex Formats: file browser

Some file browsers also include a Formats component. This is used to
select the input or output format of the selected file. Updating the
format will typically also update the filter.
