@cindex find_renz: man page
@unnumberedsec NAME

find_renz --- Identifies the position of a cut site within a sequence

@unnumberedsec SYNOPSIS

@code{find_renz} [@code{-vp}] @i{enzyme} @i{filename} ...

@unnumberedsec DESCRIPTION

@code{find_renz} may be used to determine the position that an enzyme cuts a
sequence. It's use as a command line utility is primarily designed for
internal use within @code{pregap4} and as a user utility for producing
@i{vector-primer} files for use with @code{vector_clip}. As such it is
dedicated to finding one and only one such cut site and considers no cuts
sites or multiple cut sites to be an error.

Only one enzyme may be specified, which is given by the enzyme name (upper or
lower case is not important). One or more filenames may be specified. If an
enzyme does not cut a sequence the message "Enzyme not found in sequence" will 
be sent to stderr. If an enzyme cuts a sequence more than once the message
"Found more than one match" will be sent to stderr. Otherwise output is
produced to stdout. This means that wildcards may be used (@code{find_renz -vp 
smai *.seq >> vpfile}) with the output redirected without needing to consider
whether the enzyme is suitable for all files matching the wildcard pattern.

@unnumberedsec OPTIONS
@table @asis
@item @code{-vp}
    Specifies that the output should be in a format suitable for saving to a
    vector-primer file (to use with vector_clip). Without this only the cut
    site position is listed.
@end table

@unnumberedsec SEE ALSO

_fxref(Man-vector_clip, vector_clip(1), vector_clip.1)
