@menu
@ifset html
* Formats-Introduction::        Introduction
@end ifset
* Formats-Scf::                 SCF
* Formats-Exp::                 Experiment File
* Formats-Restriction::         Restriction Enzymes
* Formats-Vector_Primer::       Vector_primer Files
* Formats-Vector-Sequences::    Vector Sequence Files
@end menu

_split()
@ifset html
@node Formats-Introduction
@unnumberedsec Introduction
@end ifset

@cindex Reading name restrictions
@cindex File name restrictions
@cindex SCF file name restrictions
@cindex Experiment file name restrictions
@cindex Sample name restrictions
@cindex Restrictions on file names
@cindex Restrictions on experiment file names
@cindex Restrictions on SCF file names
@cindex Restrictions on reading names
@cindex Restrictions on sample names


This section introduces the various file formats used by the
package, but first we describe some limitations on the names of files.
 
There are restrictions on the characters used in
file names and the length of the file names.
 
Characters permitted in file names:
 
QWERTYUIOPASDFGHJKLZXCVBNMqwertyuiopasdfghjklzxcvbnm1234567890._-
 
A reading name or experiment file name used in a sequence assembly project
must not be longer than 16 characters.
 
These restrictions also apply to SCF files which means, in turn, also to
the names given to samples obtained from sequencing instruments. For example
do not give sample names such as 27/OCT/96/r.1 when using and ABI machine:
the / symbols will be interpreted as directory name separators on UNIX!
 

Currently the formats used by the package include the following.

@menu
* Formats-Scf::                 SCF
* Formats-Ztr::                 ZTR
* Formats-Exp::                 Experiment File
* Formats-Restriction::         Restriction Enzymes
* Formats-Vector_Primer::       Vector_primer Files
* Formats-Vector-Sequences::    Vector Sequence Files
@end menu

_split()
_include(scf-t.texi)

_split()
_include(ztr-t.texi)

@page
_split()
_include(exp-t.texi)

@page
_split()
_include(renzymes-t.texi)

@page
_split()
_include(vector_primer-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Formats-Vector-Sequences
@section Vector Sequence Format
@cindex format: vector sequences
@cindex vector sequences format
@cindex plain text

Sequences such as vectors or E. coli which are compared against readings using
vector_clip
(_fpref(Vector_Clip-Introduction, Vector_clip,t))
and screen_seq
(_fpref(Screen_seq, Screening for known possible contaminant
sequences, screening), usually via pregap4
(_fpref(Pregap4-Introduction,Pregap4, pregap4)), must be stored as plain text.
i.e. the files should contain only the sequence data (no header or title)
on records (lines) of up to 60 characters. Each record should be terminated
by a newline character. No other characters should appear in the file.

