_split()
@node Gap4-Introduction
@chapter Introduction
@cindex Gap4
@menu
* Gap-Intro-Files::         Summary of the Files used and the Preprocessing Steps
* Gap-Intro-Funtions::          Summary of Gap4's Functions
* Gap-Intro-Interface::         Introduction to the Gap4 User Interface
* Gap-Intro-Interface-CS::      Introduction to the Gap4 Contig Selector
* Gap-Intro-Interface-CC::      Introduction to the Gap4 Contig Comparator
* Gap-Intro-Interface-TD::      Introduction to the Gap4 Template Display
* Gap-Intro-Interface-CD::      Introduction to the Gap4 Consistency Display
* Gap-Intro-Interface-RE::      Introduction to the Gap4 Restriction Map
* Gap-Intro-Interface-SC::      Introduction to the Gap4 Stop Codon Map
* Gap-Intro-Interface-CE::      Introduction to the Gap4 Contig Editor
* Gap-Intro-Interface-CJ::      Introduction to the Gap4 Contig Joining Editor
@end menu


Gap4 
is a Genome Assembly Program.  
The program contains all the tools that would be expected from an assembly
program plus many unique features and a very easily used interface.
The original version was described in
@cite{Bonfield,J.K., Smith,K.F. and
Staden,R. A new DNA sequence assembly program. Nucleic Acids Res. 24,
4992-4999 (1995)} 

Gap4 is very big and powerful. Everybody employs a subset of options and
has their favourite way of accessing and using them. Although there is a
lot of it, users are encouraged to go through the whole of the documentation
once, just to discover what is possible, and the way that best suits
their own work. At the very least, the whole of this introductory
chapter should be read, as in the long run, it will save time.

This chapter serves as a cross reference point, to give an overview of the
program and to introduce some of the important ideas which it uses. The
main topics that are introduced are listed in the current section. We
introduced the use of base call accuracy values for speeding up
sequencing projects 
(_fpref(Intro-Base-Acc, The use of numerical estimates of base
calling accuracy, t)).
The ability to annotate segments of readings and the consensus can be very
convenient 
(_fpref(Intro-Anno, Annotating and masking readings and contigs, t)).
Generally the 3' ends of readings from sequencing instruments are of too
low a quality to be used to create reliable consensus, but they can be
useful, for example, for finding joins between contigs
(_fpref(Intro-Hidden, Use of the "hidden" poor quality data, t)).

One of the most powerful features of gap4 is its graphical user
interface which enables the data to be viewed and manipulated at several
levels of resolution. The displays which provide these different views are 
introduced, with several screenshots
(_fpref(Gap-Intro-Interface, Introduction to the gap4 User Interface, t)).

It is important to understand the different files used by our
sequence assembly software, and how the data is processed before it
reaches gap4
(_fpref(Gap-Intro-Files,
Summary of the Files used and the Preprocessing Steps, t)).

Note that gap4 is a very flexible program, and is designed so that it
can easily be configured to suit different purposes and ways of
working. For example it is easy to create a beginners 
version of gap4 which has
only a subset of functions. What is described in this manual is the full
version, and so is likely to contain some perhaps more esoteric options
that few people will need to use.
This introductory section also contains a
complete list of the options in the gap4 main menus
(_fpref(Gap-Intro-Menus, Gap4 Menus, t)).

In addition to sequence assembly, gap4 can be used for managing mutation
study data and for helping to discover and check for mutations
(_fpref(Mutation-Detection-Introduction, Introduction to Searching for Mutations, t)).

Two further useful facilities of gap4 are "Lists" and "Notes".
For many operations it is convenient to be able to process sets of data 
together - for example to
calculate a consensus sequence for a subset of the contigs. To
facilitate this gap4 uses lists
(_fpref(Lists, Lists Introduction, lists))
A `Note' 
(_fpref(Notes, Notes, notes))
is an arbitrary piece of text which can be attached to any
reading, any contig, or to the
database in general. 


@page
_split()
@node Gap-Intro-Files
@section Summary of the Files used and the Preprocessing Steps

@cindex BUSY files
@cindex database write access
@cindex database readonly access
@cindex readonly
@cindex database limits
@cindex gap4 database limits: resetting
@cindex gap4 database sizes
@cindex gap4 database sizes: resetting
@cindex gap4 database: maxdb
@cindex gap4 database: maxseq
@cindex gap4 database: reading length limits
@cindex reading length limits in gap4
@cindex database: gap4 maxdb
@cindex database: gap4 maxseq
@cindex trace files: location
@cindex trace files: defining location
@cindex directories: trace files
@cindex gap4: viewing trace files





@cindex simultaneous database access

Gap4 stores the data for an assembly project in a gap4
database. Before being entered into the gap4 database the data must be
passed through several preassembly steps, usually via pregap4
(_fpref(Pregap4-Introduction, Pregap4 introduction, pregap4)). 
These steps are outlined below.

The programs can handle data produced by a variety of sequencing
instruments. 
They can also
handle data entered using digitisers or that has been typed in by
hand. Usually the trace files in proprietary format, such as
those of ABI, are converted to SCF files (_fpref(Formats-Scf, SCF introduction,
scf)) or ZTR files.
As originally put forward in @cite{Bonfield,J.K. and Staden,R. The application of
numerical estimates of base calling accuracy to DNA sequencing
projects. Nucleic Acids Research 23, 1406-1410 (1995).} gap4 makes
important use of basecall confidence values, 
(_fpref(Intro-Base-Acc, The use of numerical estimates of base
calling accuracy, t))
which are normally stored in the reading's SCF file.

One of the first steps in the preprocessing is to copy
the base calls from the trace files 
to text files known as Experiment files
(_fpref(Formats-Exp, Experiment files, exp)). 
All the subsequent processes operate on the Experiment files.
Other preassembly steps include quality and vector clipping.
Each step is performed by a specific program
controlled by the program pregap4
(_fpref(Pregap4-Introduction, Pregap4 introduction, pregap4)). 

Experiment file format is similar to that of EMBL sequence entries in
that each record starts with a two letter identifier, but we have
invented new records specific to sequencing experiments. One of
pregap4's tasks is to augment the Experiment files to include data about
the vectors, primers and templates used in the production of each
reading, and if necessary it can extract this information from external
databases. Some of the information is needed by pregap4 and some by
gap4. (Note that in order to get the most from gap4 it is essential to make
sure that it is supplied, via the Experiment files, with all the information
it needs.)

The trace files are not altered, but are kept as archival data so that
it is always possible to check the original base calls and traces. Any
changes to the data prior to assembly
(and we recommend that none are made until readings
can be viewed aligned with others) are made to the copy of the sequence
in the Experiment file.

The reading data, in Experiment file format, is entered into the project
database (_fpref(GapDB, Gap Database Files, gap4)), usually via one of
the assembly engines. Because Experiment file format was based on EMBL
file format, EMBL files can also be entered and their feature tables will
be convered to tags.  There is no limit to the length of readings which
can be entered.

All the changes to
the data made by gap4 are made to the copies of the data in the project
database.  Once the data has been copied into the gap4 database the
Experiment files are no longer required.

Gap4 uses the trace files to display the traces 
(_fpref(Editor-Traces, Traces, t)),
and to compare the edited bases with the original base calls
(_fpref(Editor-Search-VerifyEdit1, Search by Evidence for Edit (1), t)),
(_fpref(Editor-Search-VerifyEdit2, Search by Evidence for Edit (2), t)).
However gap4 databases do not store trace files: they record only the
names of the trace files 
(which are copied from the readings' Experiment files).
This means that
if the trace files for a project are not in the same directory/folder as
the gap4 database, gap4 needs to be told where they are, otherwise it
cannot use them. Ideally, all the trace files for a project should be stored
in one directory. To tell gap4 where they are the "Trace file location"
command in the Options menu should be used (_fpref(Conf-Trace File Location,
Trace File Location,t)).

Gap4 databases have a number of size constraints, some of which can be altered
by users and others which are fixed. 

While gap4 is running it often needs to calculate a consensus. The maximum size
of this sequence is controlled by a variable "maxseq". Most routines are able 
to automatically increase the value of maxseq while they are running, but some 
of the older functions, including some of the original assembly engines, are 
not. This means that it is important for users to set maxseq to a sufficiently 
high value before running these elderly routines. By default maxseq is 
currently set to 100000, but users can set it on the command line or from 
within the Options menu.

Gap4 databases contain one record for each reading and one for each contig. 
The sum of these two sets of records is the "database_size", and the maximum 
value that database_size is permitted to reach is "maxdb". When databases are
initialised maxdb is set, by default, to 8000. Users can alter this value on
the command line or from within the Options menu of gap4.

Gap4 databases also limit the number and names of readings so that various 
output routines know how many character positions are required: the maximum
number imposed in this way is 99,999,999, and the maximum reading name length
is 40.

Currently we have sites with single gap4 databases containing over 200,000
readings with consensus sequences in excess of 7,000,000 bases.

A gap4 database can be used by several users simultaneously, but only
one is allowed to change the contents of the database, and the others
are given "readonly" access. 
As part of its mechanism to
prevent more than one person editing a database at once
gap4 uses a "BUSY" file
to signify that the database is opened for writing.
Before opening a database for
writing, gap4 checks to see if the BUSY file for that database exists. 
If it does, the database is
opened only for reading, if not it creates the file, so that any
additional attempts to open the
database for writing will be blocked. 
When the user with write access closes the database, the BUSY file is
deleted, hence re-enabling its ability to be opened for changes.
It is worth remembering that a side effect of this mechanism, 
is that in the event of a
program or system crash the BUSY file will be left on the disk, even
though 
the database is
not being used. In this case users must remove the BUSY file 
before using the database
(_fpref(GapDB, Gap4 Database Files, t)).

The final result from a sequencing project is a consensus sequence 
(_fpref(Con-Calculation, The Consensus Calculation, calc_consensus))
and
gap4 can write these in Experiment file format, fasta format or staden
format. Of course the whole database and all the trace files are also
useful for future reference as they allow any queries about the accuracy
of the sequence to be answered.

@page
_split()
@node Gap-Intro-Funtions
@section Summary of Gap4's Functions

The tasks which gap4 can perform can be roughly divided into 
assembly
(_fpref(Assembly, Assembly Introduction, assembly)), 
finishing
(_fpref(Experiments, Finishing Experiments, experiments)),
and editing
(_fpref(Editor, Editor introduction, contig_editor)).
But gap4 contains many other functions which can help to complete a
sequencing project with the minimum amount of effort, and some of these
are listed below.

Readings are entered into the gap4 database using the 
assembly algorithms (_fpref(Assembly, Assembly Introduction, assembly)). 
In general these algorithms will build the largest 
contigs they can by finding overlaps between the readings, however some,
perhaps more doubtful, 
joins between contigs may be missed, and these can be discovered, checked 
and made using 
Find Internal Joins (_fpref(FIJ, Find Internal Joins, fij)),
Find repeats (_fpref(Repeats, Find repeats, repeats)) and
Join Contigs (_fpref(Editor-Joining, The Join Editor, contig_editor)).
Find Internal Joins compares the ends of contigs to see if there are
possible overlaps and then presents the overlap in the Contig Joining
Editor, from where the user can view the traces, make edits and join the
contigs. Find Repeats can be used in a similar way, but unlike Find
Internal Joins it does not require the matches it finds to continue to
the ends of contigs.

Read-pair data can be used to automatically put contigs into the
correct order
(_fpref(Order-Contigs, Ordering Contigs, contig_ordering)),
and information about contigs which share templates can be plotted out
(_fpref(Read Pairs, Find Read Pairs, read_pairs)).
The relationships of readings and templates, within and between contigs
can also be shown by the Template Display
(_fpref(Template-Display, Template Display, template))
which has a wide selection of display modes and uses.

Problems with the assembly can be revealed by use of 
Check Assembly (_fpref(Check Assembly, Checking Assemblies, check_ass)),
Find repeats (_fpref(Repeats, Find repeats, repeats)), and 
Restriction Enzyme mapping
(_fpref(Restrict, Plotting Restriction Enzymes, restrict_enzymes)).
Check Assembly compares every reading with the segment of the consensus
it overlaps to see how well it aligns. Those that align poorly are
plotted out in the Contig Comparator. Find Repeats also presents its
results in the Contig Comparator, so if used in conjunction with Check
Assembly, it can show cases where readings have been assembled into
the wrong copy of a repeated element. At the end of a project 
the Restriction Enzyme map function can be used 
to compare the consensus sequence with a restriction digest of
the target sequence.
Problems can also be found by use of the various Coverage Plots available in
the Consistency Display
(_fpref(Consistency-Display, Consistency Display, consistency)). These
plots will show regions of low or high reading coverage
(_fpref(Consistency-ReadingCov, Reading Coverage Histogram,
consistency_display)),
places with data for only one strand
(_fpref(Consistency-StrandCov, Strand Coverage, consistency_display)),
or where there is no read-pair coverage
(_fpref(Consistency-ReadPairCov, Read-Pair Coverage Histogram, consistency_display)).
Errors can be corrected by 
Disassemble Readings (_fpref(Disassemble, Disassembling Readings, disassembly))
and Break Contig (_fpref(Break Contig, Breaking Contigs, disassembly)) which
can remove readings from contigs or databases or can break contigs.

The general level of completeness of the consensus sequence
can be seen diagrammatically using the 
Quality Plot (_fpref(Template-Quality, Quality Plot, template)), and
the confidence values for each base in the consensus sequence can be
plotted (_fpref(Consistency-Confidence, Confidence
Values Graph, consistency_display)).

The most powerful component of gap4 is its Contig Editor 
(_fpref(Editor, Editor introduction, contig_editor)).
which has many
display modes and search facilities to enable very rapid discovery and
fixing of base call errors.

If working on a protein coding sequence, the
consensus can be analysed using the
Stop Codon Map (_fpref(Stops, Stop Codon Map, stops)), and
its translation viewed using the Contig Editor
(_fpref(Editor-Status, Status Line, contig_editor)).

The final result from a sequencing project is a consensus sequence 
(_fpref(Con-Calculation, The Consensus Calculation, calc_consensus)).


@page
_split()
@node Gap-Intro-Interface
@section Introduction to the gap4 User Interface

Gap4 has a main window from which all the main options are selected from
menus. When a database is open it also has a Contig Selector which will
transform into a Contig Comparator whenever needed. In addition many of
the gap4 functions, such as the Contig Editor or the Template Display
will create their own windows when they are activated. All the graphical
displays and the Contig Editor can be scrolled in register. The base of the
graphical display
windows usually contains an Information Line for showing short textual
data about results or items touched by the mouse cursor. Gap4 is
best operated using a three button mouse, but alternative keybindings
are available. Full details of the user interface
are described elsewhere
(_fpref(UI-Introduction, User Interface, t)), and here we give an
introduction based around a series of screenshots.

The main window (shown below) contains an Output window for
textual results, an Error window for error messages, and a series of
menus arranged along the top. The contents of the two text windows can
be searched, edited and saved. Each set of results is preceded by
a header containing the time and date when it was generated.

Some of the text will be underlined and shaded differently. These are
hyperlinks which perform an operation when clicked (with the left mouse
button) on, typically invoking a graphical display such as the contig
editor. Clicking on these with the right mouse button will bring up a menu of
additional operations. At present only a few commands (Show Relationships and 
the Search functions) produce hypertext, but if there is sufficient interest
this may be expanded on.

_lpicture(interface.output)

@page
_split()
@node Gap-Intro-Interface-CS
@subsection Introduction to the Contig Selector


The gap4 Contig Selector is used to display, select and reorder contigs.
In the Contig Selector all contigs
are shown as colinear horizontal lines separated by short vertical
lines. The length of the horizontal
lines is proportional to the length of the contigs and their left to
right order represents the current
ordering of the contigs. Users can change the contig order by
dragging the lines representing the contigs. This is done by clicking
and holding the middle mouse button, or Alt left mouse button, 
on a line and then moving the mouse cursor.
The Contig Selector can also be used to select
contigs for processing. For example, clicking with the right mouse
button on the line representing a
contig will invoke a menu containing the
commands which can be performed on that
contig. 
There are several alternative ways of specifying which contig an
operation should be performed on. Contigs are identified by the name or
number of any reading they contain. When a dialogue is requesting a
contig name, using the left mouse button to click on the contig in the
Contig Selector will
transfer its name to the dialogue box. Other methods are available
(_fpref(Contig-Selector-Contigs, Selecting Contigs, t)).

As the mouse is moved over a contig, it is highlighted and the contig
name (left
most reading name) and length are displayed in the Information Line. 
The number in brackets is the contig number (actually the number of its
leftmost reading).
Tags or annotations
(_fpref(Intro-Anno, Annotating and masking readings and contigs, t))
can also be displayed in the
Contig Selector window. 

_picture(contig_selector)

The figure shows a typical display from  the Contig Selector. At the top
are the File, View and Results menus. Below that are buttons for
zooming and  for displaying the crosshair. The  four  boxes to the
right are used to display the X and  Y coordinates of the crosshair. The
rightmost two   display the Y  coordinates  when the contig  selector is
transformed  into    the   Contig   Comparator.
The  two leftmost   boxes display the  X  coordinates: the
leftmost is the position in the contig and the  other is the position in
the overall consensus. The  crosshair is the  vertical line spanning the
panel below. Tags are shown as coloured rectangles above and below the
lines
(_fpref(Contig Selector, Contig Selector, contig_selector)).

@page
_split()
@node Gap-Intro-Interface-CC
@subsection Introduction to the Contig Comparator

Gap4 commands such as Find Internal Joins (_fpref(FIJ, Find Internal
Joins, fij)), Find Repeats (_fpref(Repeats, Find Repeats, repeats)),
Check Assembly (_fpref(Check Assembly, Check Assembly, check_ass)), and
Find Read Pairs (_fpref(Read Pairs, Find Read Pairs, read_pairs))
automatically transform the Contig Selector (_fpref(Contig Selector,
Contig Selector, contig_selector)) to produce the Contig Comparator.
To
produce this transformation a copy of the Contig Selector is added at
right angles to the original window to create a two dimensional
rectangular surface on which to display the results of comparing or
checking contigs. 

Each of the functions plots its results as diagonal
lines of different colours.  In general, 
if the plotted points are close to the main
diagonal they represent results from pairs of contigs that are in the
correct relative order.  Lines parallel to the main diagonal represent
contigs that are in the correct relative orientation to one another.
Those perpendicular to the main diagonal show results for which one
contig would need to be reversed before the pair could be joined.  The
manual contig dragging procedure can be used to change the relative
positions of contigs.  _fxref(Contig-Selector-Order, Changing the Contig
Order, contig_selector) As the contigs are dragged the plotted results
will automatically be moved to their corresponding new positions.  This
means that, in general, 
if users drag the contigs to move their plotted results close
to the main diagonal they will simultaneously be putting their contigs
into the correct relative positions.

This plot can simultaneously show the results of independent types of
search, making it easy for users to see if different analyses produce
corroborating evidence for the ordering of contigs. Indications that a
reading may have been assembled in an incorrect position can also be
seen - if for example a result from Check Assembly lies on the same
horizontal or vertical projection as a result from Find Repeats, users
can see the alternative position to place the doubtful reading.

The plotted results can be used to invoke a subset of commands by the
use of pop-up menus.
For example if the user clicks the right mouse button over
a result from Find Internal Joins a menu containing Invoke Join Editor
(_fpref(Editor-Joining, The Join Editor, contig_editor)) and Invoke
Contig Editors (_fpref(Editor, Editing in gap4, contig_editor))
will pop up. If the user selects Invoke Join Editor the Join Editor will
be started with the two contigs aligned at the match position contained
in the result. If required one of the contigs will be complemented to
allow their alignment. 

@page
_lpicture(comparator)

A typical display from the Contig Comparator is shown above. It includes
results for Find Internal Joins in black, Find Repeats in red, Check
Assembly in green, and Find Read Pairs in blue. 
Notice that there are several internal joins, read pairs and repeats
close to the main diagonal near the top left of the display. This
indicates that the contigs represented in that area are 
likely to be in the correct positions relative to one another. In the
middle of the bottom right quadrant there is a blue diagonal line
perpendicular to the main diagonal. This indicates a pair of contigs
that are in the wrong relative orientation. The crosshairs show the
positions for a pair of 
contigs. The vertical line continues into the Contig Selector part of
the display, and the position represented by the horizontal line is also
duplicated there
(_fpref(Contig Comparator, Contig Comparator, comparator)).


@page
_split()
@node Gap-Intro-Interface-TD
@subsection Introduction to the Template Display

The Template Display can show schematic plots of readings, templates,
tags, restriction enzyme sites and the consensus quality. Colour coding
distinguishes reading, primer and template types. The Template Display
can also be used to reorder contigs and to invoke the Contig Editor.

An example showing all these information types can be seen in the Figure below.


_lpicture(template.display)

The large top section contains lines and arrows representing readings
and templates. Beneath this are rulers;
one for each contig, and below those is the quality plot. 
The template and reading section of the display is in two parts. The top
part contains the templates which have been sequenced from both ends but
which are in some way inconsistent - for example given the current
relative positions of their readings, they may have a length that is
larger or greater than that expected, or the two readings may, as it
were, face away from one another. Colour coding is used to distinguish
between different types of inconsistency, and whether or not the
inconsistency involves readings within or between contigs. For example,
most of the problems shown in the screendump above are coloured
dark yellow, indicating an inconsistency between a pair of contigs.
The rest of the data, (mostly dark blue indicating templates sequenced
from only one end), is plotted below the data for the inconsistent
templates.
Forward readings are light blue and reverse readings are orange.
Templates in bright yellow have been sequenced from both ends, are consistent and
span a pair of contigs (and so indicating the relative orientation and
separation of the contigs). 

At the bottom is the restriction enzyme plot.
The coloured blocks immediately above and below the ruler are tags.
Those above the ruler 
can also be seen on their corresponding readings in the large top
section. 
The display can be zoomed. The position of a crosshair
is shown in the two left most boxes in the top right hand corner. 
The leftmost
shows the distance in bases between the crosshair and the start of the 
contig
underneath the crosshair. The middle box shows the distance between the
crosshair and the start of the first contig. The right box shows the 
distance
between two selected cut sites in the restriction enzyme plots
(_fpref(Template-Display, Template Display, template)).

@page
_split()
@node Gap-Intro-Interface-CD
@subsection Introduction to the Consistency Display

The Consistency Display provides plots designed to highlight 
potential problems in contigs. It
is invoked from the main gap4 View menu by selecting any of its plots. Once
a plot has been displayed, any of the other types of consistency plot can
be displayed within the same frame from the View menu of the Consistency
Display. 

An example showing the Confidence Values Graph and the corresponding Reading
Coverage Histogram, Read-Pair Coverage Histogram and Strand Coverage
is shown below.

_lpicture(consistency_p)

If more than one contig is displayed, the contigs are
drawn immediately after one another but are staggered in the y direction.

The ruler ticks can be turned on or off from the View menu of the consistency
display. 
The plots can be enlarged or reduced using the standard zooming mechanism.
_fxref(UI-Graphics-Zoom, Zooming, interface)

The crosshair toggle button controls whether the crosshair is visible. This is
shown as a black vertical and horizontal line. The position of the crosshair is
shown in the 3 boxes to the right of the 
crosshair toggle. The first box indicates the cursor position in the current
contig. The second box indicates the overall position of the cursor in the 
consensus. The last box shows the y position of the crosshair. 
(_fpref(Consistency-Display, Consistency Display, consistency)).


@page
_split()
@node Gap-Intro-Interface-RE
@subsection Introduction to the Restriction Enzyme Map

The restriction enzyme map function finds and displays restriction sites
within a specified region of a contig. Users can select the enzyme
types to search for and can save the sites found as tags within the
database.

_lpicture(restrict_enzymes)

This figure shows a typical view of the Restriction Enzyme Map
in which the results for each enzyme type have been configured by the
user to be drawn in different colours.  On the left of the display the
enzyme names are shown adjacent to their rows of plotted results. If no
result is found for any particular enzyme eg here APAI, the row will
still be shown so that zero cutters can be identified. Three of the
enzymes types have been selected and are shown highlighted. The results
can be scrolled vertically (and horizontally if the plot is zoomed in).
A ruler is shown along the base and the current cursor position (the 
vertical black line) is shown in the left hand box near the top right of
the display.  If the user clicks, in turn, on two restriction sites
their separation in base pairs will appear in the top right hand box.
Information about the last site touched is shown in the Information line
at the bottom of the display. At the top the edit menu is shown
and can be used to create tags for highlighted enzyme types
(_fpref(Restrict, Restriction Enzyme Search, restrict_enzymes)).


@page
_split()
@node Gap-Intro-Interface-SC
@subsection Introduction to the Stop Codon Map

The Stop Codon Map plots the positions of all the stop codons on one or
both strands of a contig consensus sequence.  If the Contig Editor is 
being used on
the same contig, the Refresh button will be enabled, and if used, will 
fetch the
current consensus from the editor, repeat the search and replot the stop
codons.

_lpicture(stops)

The figure shows a typical zoomed in view of the Stop Codon Map display.
The positions for the stop codons in each reading frame (here all six
frames are
shown) are displayed in horizontal strips. Along the top are buttons for
zooming, the crosshair toggle, a refresh
button and two boxes for showing the crosshair position. The left box shows
the current position and the right-hand box the separation of the last two
stop codons selected by the user.  Below the display of stop codons is a
ruler and a horizontal scrollbar. The information line is showing the data 
for
the last stop codon the user has touched with the cursor. Also shown on the
left is the View menu which is used to select the 
reading frames to display
(_fpref(Stops, Stop Codon Map, stops)).


@page
_split()
@node Gap-Intro-Interface-CE
@subsection Introduction to the Contig Editor

The gap4 Contig Editor is designed to allow rapid checking and editing of
characters in assembled readings. Very large savings in time can be achieved
by its sophisticated problem finding procedures which automatically direct the
user only to the bases that require attention.  The following is a selection of
screenshots to give an overview of its use.

_lpicture(contig_editor.screen)

The figure above shows a screendump from the Contig Editor
which contains segments of aligned
readings, their consensus and a six phase translation. The Commands menu
is also shown.  The main components are: the controls at
the top; reading names on the left; sequences to their right; and status lines
at the bottom. Some of the reading names are written in light grey which
indicates that their traces/chromatograms are being displayed (in
another window, see below).

One reading name is written with inverse colours, which indicates that it
has been selected by the user. To the left of each reading name is the reading
number, which is negative for readings which have been reversed and complemented.
The first of the status lines, labelled "Strands", is showing a
summary of strand coverage. The left half of the segment of sequence
being displayed is covered
only by readings from one strand of the DNA, but the right half contains data
from both strands.

Along the top of the editor window is a row of command buttons
and menus. The rightmost pair of buttons provide help
and exit.  To their left are two menus, one of which is currently in use.  To
the left of this is a button which initially displays a search dialogue,
and then pressing it again, will perform the selected search. 
Further left is the undo button:
each time the user clicks on this box the program reverses the previous edit
command.  The next button, labelled "Cutoffs" is used to toggle between
showing or hiding the reading data that is of poor quality or is vector
sequence. In this figure it has been activated, showing the poor quality
data in light grey. Within this, sequencing vector is displayed in
lilac. The next button to the left is the Edit Modes menu
which allows users to select which editing commands are enabled. The
next command toggles between insert and replace and so governs the effect of
typing in the edit window.

One of the readings contains a yellow tag, and elsewhere some bases are
coloured red, which indicates they are of poor quality.  The Information Line
at the bottom of the window can show 
information about readings, annotations and
base calls. In this case it is showing information about the reliability of
the base beneath the editing cursor.

_lpicture(contig_editor_grey_scale)

A better way of displaying the accuracy of bases is to shade their
surroundings so that the lighter the background the better the data.
In the figure above, this grey scale encoding of the base accuracy or
confidence has been activated for bases in the readings and the
consensus. This
screenshot also shows the Contig Editor displaying disagreements and edits.
Disagreements between the consensus and individual base calls are shown
in dark green. Notice that these disagreements are in poor
quality base calls. Edits (here they are all pads) are shown with a
light green background. When they are present, replacements/insertions
are shown in pink, deletions in red and confidence value changes in purple.
The consensus confidence takes into account several factors, including
individual base confidences, sequencing chemistry, and strand coverage.
It can be seen that the consensus for 
the section covered by data from only one strand has been calculated to
be of lower confidence than the rest. The Status Line includes two
positions marked with exclamation marks (!) which means that the
sequence is covered by data from both strands, but that the consensus
for each of the two strands is different.
The Information Line at the bottom of the window is showing
information about the reading under the cursor: its name, number,
clipped length, full length, sequencing vector and BAC clone name.

_lpicture(contig_editor.traces)

The Contig Editor can rapidly display the traces for any reading or set
of readings. The number of rows and columns of traces 
displayed can be set by the user. The traces scroll in register with one
another, and with the cursor in the Contig Editor. Conversely, the
Contig Editor cursor can be scrolled by the trace cursor. 
A typical view is shown above.

This figure is an example of the Trace Display showing three traces
from readings in the previous two Contig Editor screendumps.
These are the best two traces from each strand plus a trace from a
reading which contains a disagreement with the consensus. The program
can be configured to automatically 
bring up this combination of traces for each
problem located by the "Next search" option.
The histogram or vertical bars plotted top down show the confidence
value for each base call. The reading number, together with the direction of
the reading (+ or -) and the chemistry by which it was determined, is given at
the top left of each sub window.  There are three buttons ('Info', 'Diff', and
'Quit') arranged vertically with X and Y scale bars to their right. The Info
button produces a window like the one shown in the bottom right hand
corner. The Diff button is mostly used for mutation detection, and causes a
pair of traces to be subtracted from one another and the result plotted, hence
revealing their differences.  (_fpref(Editor-Traces, Traces, contig_editor)).

@page
_split()
@node Gap-Intro-Interface-CJ
@subsection Introduction to the Contig Joining Editor

Contigs are joined interactively using the Join Editor.
This is simply a pair
of contig editor displays stacked one above the other with a "differences"
line in between. The Contig Join Editor is usually invoked by clicking
on a Find Internal Joins, or Find Repeats result in the Contig
Comparator. In which case the two contigs will appear 
with the match found by these searches displayed.

The few differences between the Join Editor and the Contig Editor can be seen
in the figure below. Otherwise all the commands and operations are the
same as those for the Contig Editor.

_lpicture(contig_editor.join)

In this figure the Cutoff or Hidden data is being displayed for the
right hand contig. One difference between the Contig Editor and the Join
Editor is the Lock button. When set (as it is in the
illustration) the two contigs scroll in register, otherwise they can be
scrolled independently.

The Align button aligns the overlapping consensus sequences
(_fpref(Editor-Joining, Editor joining, contig_editor)).

