_include(gap4_org-t.texi)
_include(gap4_mini-t.texi)
_include(gap4_intro-t.texi)
@page
_split()
@node Contig Selector
@chapter Contig Selector
_include(contig_selector-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Contig Comparator
@chapter Contig Comparator
_include(comparator-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Contig-Overviews
@chapter Contig Overviews
_include(template-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Quality
@section Plotting Consensus Quality
_include(quality_plot-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Stops
@section Plotting Stop Codons
_include(stops-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Restrict
@section Plotting Restriction Enzymes
_include(restrict_enzymes-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Editor
@chapter Editing in Gap4
_include(contig_editor-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Assembly
@chapter Assembling and Adding Readings to a Database
_include(assembly-t.texi)


@page
_split()
@node Ordering-and-Joining
@chapter Ordering and Joining Contigs
_include(contig_ordering-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Read Pairs
@section Find Read Pairs
_include(read_pairs-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node FIJ
@section Find Internal Joins
_include(fij-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Repeats
@section Find Repeats
_include(repeats-t.texi)

@page
_split()
_include(disassembly-t.texi)

@page
_split()
_include(exp_suggest-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Calculate Consensus
@chapter Calculating Consensus Sequences
_include(calc_consensus-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node gap4-misc
@chapter Miscellaneous functions
@menu
* Complement::    Complement a contig
* Enter Tags::    Entering Files of Tags into a Database
* Show Relationships:: List Reading and Contig Information
* Find Oligos::   Sequence Search
* Auto Clipping:: Automatic Clipping by Quality and Sequence Similarity
* Contig Navigation:: Navigate to contig regions from file
@end menu

_split()
_include(complement-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Show Relationships
@section Show Relationships
_include(show_rel-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Contig Navigation
@section Contig Navigation
_include(contig_navigation-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Find Oligos
@section Sequence Search
_include(find_oligo-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Extract Readings
@section Extract Readings
_include(extract-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Auto Clipping
@section Automatic Clipping by Quality and Sequence Similarity
_include(clip-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Results
@chapter Results Manager
_include(results-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Lists
@chapter Lists
_include(lists-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Notes
@chapter Notes
_include(notes-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node GapDB
@chapter Gap4 Database Files
_include(gap_database-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Copy Readings
@chapter Copy Readings
_include(copy_reads-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Check Database
@chapter Check Database
_include(check_db-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Doctor Database
@chapter Doctor Database
_include(doctor_db-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Conf
@chapter Configuring
_include(configure-t.texi)


_split()
@node Gap4-Cline
@chapter Command Line Arguments
@cindex Command line arguments

@table @code
@cindex -maxdb
@cindex maxdb (command line option)
@item -maxdb
Specifies the maximum number of readings plus contigs. This value is not
automatically adjusted whilst the program is running, but is not allowed to be
set to a value too small for the database to be opened. It controls the size
of some areas of memory (approximately @code{16*maxdb} bytes) used during
execution of gap. The default value is @code{8000}.
@sp 1
@cindex -maxseq
@cindex maxseq (command line option)
@item -maxseq
Specifies the maximum number of characters used in the concatenated consensus
sequences. This parameter is generally not required as the value is normally
computed and adjusted automatically. However a few functions (such as
assembly) still need to know a maximum size before hand. The default is
@code{100000} bases.
@sp 1
@item -ro
@itemx -read_only
@cindex -read_only
@cindex read_only (command line option)
Opens the database (if specified on the command line) in read only mode. This
does not apply to databases opened using the file browser.
@sp 1
@cindex -check
@cindex -nocheck
@cindex nocheck (command line option)
@cindex check (command line option)
@item -check
@itemx -no_check
Specifies whether to run the "Check Database" option when opening new
databases. @code{-check} forces this to always be done and @code{-nocheck}
forces it to never be done. By default Check Database is always performed when
opening databases in read-write mode and never performed when opening in
read-only mode.
@sp 1
@item -exec_notes
@itemx -no_exec_notes
@cindex -exec_notes
@cindex -no_exec_notes
@cindex security
Controls whether to search for and execute any Notes of type
@code{OPEN} or @code{CLOS}. This may be an important security measure
if you are using foreign databases. Gap4 defaults to -no_check_notes.
@sp 1
@item -rawdata_note
@itemx -no_rawdata_note
@cindex -rawdata_note
@cindex -no_rawdata_note
Controls whether to make use of the @code{RAWD} note type for
specifying the trace file search path. Defaults to -rawdata_note.
@sp 1
@item -csel
@itemx -no_csel
@cindex -csel
@cindex -no_csel
Controls whether to automatically start up the contig selector when
opening a new gap4 database. In some cases (such as when dealing with
many EST clusters each in their own contig) the contig selector is not
a practical tool; this simply offers a way of speeding up database
opening. Defaults to -csel.
@sp 1
@item --
Treat this as the last command line option. Only useful if the database name
is specified and the name starts with a minus character (not
recommended!).
@end table

_ifdef([[_unix]],[[
@page
_split()
@node Convert
@chapter Converting Old Databases
_include(convert-t.texi)
]])

