@page
_split()
@node Gap-Intro-Menus
@section Gap4 Menus


The main window for gap4 contains File, Edit, View, Options, Experiments,
Lists and Assembly menus. 

@node Gap-Intro-Menus-File
@subsection Gap4 File menu

The File menu includes database opening and
copying functions and consensus calculation options. 

@itemize @bullet
@item Change Directory (_fpref(GapDB-Directories, Directories, Directories))
@item Check Database (_fpref(Check Database, Check Database, check_db))
@item New (_fpref(GapDB-New, Opening a New Database, newdb))
@item Open (_fpref(GapDB-Existing, Opening an Existing Database, exist))
@item Copy Database (_fpref(GapDB-CopyDatabase, Making Backups of Databases,db))
@item Copy Readings (_fpref(Copy Reads, Copying Readings,copy_reads))
@item Save Consensus (_fpref(Con-Calculation, The Consensus Calculation,calc_consensus))
@item Extract Readings (_fpref(Extract Readings, Extract Readings, ex))
@end itemize

@node Gap-Intro-Menus-Edit
@subsection Gap4 Edit menu
The Edit menu
contains options that alter the contents of the database.

@itemize @bullet
@item Edit Contig (_fpref(Editor, Editor introduction, contig_editor))
@item Join Contigs (_fpref(Editor-Joining, Editor joining, contig_editor))
@item Save Contig Order (_fpref(Order-Contigs, Order Contigs, contig_ordering))
@item Break Contig (_fpref(Break Contig, Break Contig, disassembly))
@item Complement a Contig (_fpref(Complement, Complement a Contig, c))
@item Order Contigs (_fpref(Order-Contigs, Order Contigs, contig_ordering))
@item Quality Clip (_fpref(Clip-Quality, Quality Clipping, c))
@item Difference Clip (_fpref(Clip-Difference, Difference Clipping, d))
@item Double Strand (_fpref(Double Strand, Double Strand, exp_suggest))
@item Disassemble Readings (_fpref(Break Contig, Break Contig, disassembly))
@item Enter Tags (_fpref(Enter Tags, Enter Tags, complement))
@item Edit Notebooks (_fpref(Notes, Notes, notes))
@item Doctor Database (_fpref(Doctor Database, Doctor database, doctor_db))
@end itemize

@node Gap-Intro-Menus-View
@subsection Gap4 View menu

The View menu contains options to look at the data at several levels of
detail, and analytic functions which present their results graphically.

@itemize @bullet
@item Contig Selector (_fpref(Contig Selector, Contig Selector,contig_selector))
@item ResultsManager (_fpref(Results, Results Manager, results))
@item Find Internal Joins (_fpref(FIJ, Find Internal Joins, fij))
@item Find Read Pairs (_fpref(Read Pairs, Find Read Pairs, read_pairs))
@item Find Repeats (_fpref(Repeats, Find repeats, repeats))
@item Check Assembly (_fpref(Check Assembly, Check Assembly, check_ass))
@item Sequence Search (_fpref(Find Oligos, Find Oligos, find_oligo))
@item Template Display (_fpref(Template-Display, Template Display, template))
@item Show Relationships (_fpref(Show Relationships, Show Relationships, show_rel))
@item Restriction Enzyme map
(_fpref(Restrict, Restriction Enzyme Search, restrict_enzymes))
@item Stop Codon Map (_fpref(Stops, Stop Codon Map, stops))
@item Quality Plot (_fpref(Template-Quality, Quality Plot, template))
@item List Confidence (_fpref(Con-Evaluation, List Confidence, calc_consensus))
@item Reading Coverage Histogram (_fpref(Consistency-ReadingCov, Reading
Coverage Histogram, consistency_display))
@item Read-Pair Coverage Histogram (_fpref(Consistency-ReadPairCov,
Read-Pair Coverage Histogram, consistency_display))
@item Strand Coverage (_fpref(Consistency-StrandCov, Strand Coverage, consistency_display))
@item Confidence Values Graph (_fpref(Consistency-Confidence, Confidence
Values Graph, consistency_display))
@end itemize

@node Gap-Intro-Menus-Options
@subsection Gap4 Options menu
The Options menu contains options for configuring gap4.

@itemize @bullet
@item Consensus Algorithm
(_fpref(Conf-Consensus Algorithm, Consensus Algorithm, configure))
@item Set Maxseq
(_fpref(Conf-Set Maxseq, Set Maxseq, configure))
@item Set Fonts
(_fpref(Conf-Fonts, Set Fonts, configure))
_ifdef([[_unix]],[[@item Colours
(_fpref(Conf-Colour, The Colour Configuration Window, configure))]])
@item Configure Menus
(_fpref(Conf-Configure Menus, Configuring Menus, configure))
@item Set Genetic Code
(_fpref(Conf-Set Genetic Code, Set Genetic Code, configure))
@item Alignment Scores
(_fpref(Conf-Alignment Scores, Alignment Scores, configure))
@item Trace File Location
(_fpref(Conf-Trace File Location, Trace File Location, configure))
@end itemize

@node Gap-Intro-Menus-Experiments
@subsection Gap4 Experiments menu

The Experiments menu contains options to analyse the contigs and to
suggest experimental solutions to problems.

@itemize @bullet
@item Suggest Long Readings (_fpref(Suggest Long, Suggest Long Readings, exp_suggest))
@item Suggest Primers (_fpref(Suggest Primers, Suggest Primers, exp_suggest))
@item Compressions and Stops
(_fpref(Compressions, Compressions and Stops, exp_suggest))
@item Suggest Probes
(_fpref(Suggest Probes, Suggest Probes, exp_suggest))
@end itemize

@node Gap-Intro-Menus-Lists
@subsection Gap4 Lists menu

The Lists menu contains a set of options for creating and editing lists for
use in various parts of the program.

@itemize @bullet
@item Creation and Editing 
(_fpref(Lists, Lists Introduction, lists))
@item Contigs To Readings
(_fpref(List-ContigToRead, Contigs To Readings Command, lists))
@item Minimal Coverage
(_fpref(List-MinCoverage, Lists Minimum Coverage, lists))
@item Unattached Readings
(_fpref(List-Unattached, Lists Unattached Readings, lists))
@end itemize


@node Gap-Intro-Menus-Assembly
@subsection Gap4 Assembly menu
The Assembly menu contains various assembly and data entry methods.

@itemize @bullet
@item Normal Shotgun Assembly
(_fpref(Assembly-Shot, Normal Shotgun Assembly, assembly))
@item Directed Assembly (_fpref(Assembly-Directed, Directed Assembly,
assembly))
@item Screen Only (_fpref(Assembly-Screen, Assembly Screen Only, assembly))
@item Assembly Independently
(_fpref(Assembly-Ind, Assembly Independently, assembly))
_ifdef([[_unix]],[[@item Cap2 Assembly (_fpref(Assembly-CAP2, Assembly CAP2, assembly))
@item Cap3 Assembly (_fpref(Assembly-CAP3, Assembly CAP3, assembly))
@item FAKII Assembly (_fpref(Assembly-FAKII, Assembly FAKII, assembly))
@item Phrap Assembly (_fpref(Assembly-Phrap Assemble, Phrap Assembly, assembly))
]])@end itemize

@page
_split()
@node Intro-Base-Acc
@section The use of numerical estimates of base calling accuracy

@cindex Base accuracies - use of
@cindex Confidence values - use of
@cindex Quality values - use of
@cindex Editing and base accuracies


In this section we give an overview of our use, when available, of
base call accuracy estimates or confidence values. We also explain
the importance of the consensus calculations used by gap4, and their
role in minimising the work needed to complete sequencing projects.

We first put forward the idea of using numerical estimates of base
calling accuracy in our paper describing SCF format 
@cite{Dear, S. and Staden, R, 1992. A standard file format for data from DNA
sequencing instruments. DNA Sequence 3, 107-110} and then expanded on
their use for editing and assembly in 
@cite{Bonfield,J.K. and Staden,R. The application of numerical estimates
of base calling accuracy to DNA sequencing projects. Nucleic Acids
Res. 23, 1406-1410 (1995)}.

In Bonfield and Staden (1995), we stated 
"...the most useful outcome of having a sequence reading determined by a
computer-controlled instrument would be that each base was assigned a
numerical estimate of its probability of having been called
correctly... having numerical estimates of base accuracy is the key to
further automation of data handling for sequencing projects. ... The
simple procedure we propose in this paper is a method of using the
numerical estimates of base calling accuracy to obviate much of the
tedious and time consuming trace checking currently performed during a
sequencing project. In summary we propose that the numerical estimates
of base accuracy should be used by software to decide if conflicts
between readings require human expertise to help adjudicate. We argue
that if the accuracy estimates are reasonably reliable then the
majority of conflicts can be ignored... and so the time taken to check
and edit a contig will be greatly reduced." 

This has been achieved by making the consensus calculations 
(_fpref(Con-Calculation, The Consensus Calculation, calc_consensus))
central to gap4, and by providing calculations which 
make use of base call accuracy estimates to give each
consensus base a quality measure. 
The consensus is not stored in
the gap4 database but is calculated when required by each function
that needs it, and hence always takes into account the current data. 
In the Contig Editor the consensus is updated instantly to reflect any
change made by the user.

In 1998 the first useable probability values became available through
the program Phred
(@i{Ewing, B. and Green, P.
Base-Calling of Automated Sequencer Traces Using Phred. II. Error
Probabilities. Genome Research. Vol 8 no 3. 186-194 (1998)}).
Phred produces a confidence value that defines the probability that the
base call is correct. This was an important step forward and
these values are widely used and have defined a decibel type
scale for base call confidence values. Gap4 is currently set to use 
confidence values defined on this scale.

The confidence value is given by the formula
@example
     C_value = -10*log10(probability of error)
@end example

A confidence value of 10 corresponds to an error rate of 1/10; 20 to
1/100; 30 to 1/1000; and so on. Using the main
gap4 consensus algorithm they enable the production of a consensus
sequence for which the expected error rate for each base is known.

As is described elsewhere
(_fpref(Con-Evaluation, List Consensus Confidence, calc_consensus))
being able to calculate the confidence for each base in the consensus
sequence makes it possible to estimate the number of errors it contains,
and hence the number of errors that will be removed if particular bases
are checked and, if necessary, edited. 
For example, if 1000 bases in the consensus had confidence
20, we would expect those 1000 bases (with an error rate of 1/100) to
contain 10 errors.

Another program which produces decibel scale confidence values for ABI
377 data is ATQA 
@cite{Daniel H. Wagner, Associates, at http://www.wagner.com/}.

For gap4 the confidence values
are expected to lie in the range 1 to 99, with 0 and 100
having special meanings to the program.

The confidence values are stored
in SCF or Experiment files and copied into gap4 databases during assembly
or data entry. 

The searches provided by the Contig Editor
(_fpref(Editor-Searching, Searching, contig_editor))
are one of gap4's most important time saving features. The user
selects a search type, for example to find places where the confidence
for the consensus falls below a given threshold, and the search
automatically moves the cursor to the next such position in the
consensus. The Contig Editor locates the next
problem by applying the consensus calculation 
to the contig.
To edit a contig the user selects
"Search" repeatedly, knowing that it will 
only move to places where there is a conflict
between good data or where the data is poor.
Note that the program is usually configured to automatically
display the relevant traces for each position located by the search option.

The main result is that far fewer disagreements
between data are brought to the attention of the user and fewer traces
have to be inspected by eye, and so the whole process is faster.
Another consequence of the
strategy is that, as fewer bases need changing to produce the correct
consensus, most of what appears on the screen will be the original
base calls. Indeed we have taken this a step further and suggest
that if a base needs changing because it has a high accuracy estimate,
and is conflicting with other good data, then rather than change the
character shown on the screen, the user should lower its accuracy
value. By so doing more of the original base calls are left unchanged
and hence are visible to the user. There is a function within the
contig editor to reset the accuracy value for the current base to
0. Alternatively the accuracy value for the base that is thought to be
correct can be set within the contig editor to 100. 

@page
_split()
@node Intro-Hidden
@section Use of the "hidden" poor quality data
_include(hidden-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Intro-Anno
@section Annotating and masking readings and contigs
_include(tags-t.texi)

