@node Gap5-Intro-Manual
@chapter Organisation of the gap5 Manual


The main body of the gap5 manual is divided, where possible, 
into sections covering related topics. If appropriate, these sections
commence with an overview of the functions they contain.
After the Introduction, the manual contains chapters on some important
components of the user interface: the Contig Selector
(_fpref(Contig Selector, Contig Selector, contig_selector)),
the Contig Comparator
(_fpref(Contig Comparator, Contig Comparator, comparator)),
and then, in the chapter on Contig Overviews 
(_fpref(Contig-Overviews, Contig Overviews, c))
we describe the Template
Display
(_fpref(Template-Display, Template Display, template)),
and its subcomponents
the Stop Codon Plot
(_fpref(Stops, Stop Codon Map, stops)), and the
Restriction Enzyme Plot
(_fpref(Restrict, Restriction Enzyme Search, restrict_enzymes)).

Then there is a long chapter on the powerful Contig Editor
(_fpref(Editor, Editor introduction, contig_editor)), followed by a
chapter describing the many assembly engines and assembly modes which
gap4 can offer
(_fpref(Assembly, Assembly Introduction, assembly)).

Gap4 contains functions to use the data in an assembly database to find the
left to right order of contigs, and to compare their consensus sequences
to look for joins that may have been missed during assembly.
A "read-pair" is obtained by sequencing a DNA template (or "insert")
from both ends: we then know the relative orientations of the two
readings, and if we know the approximate
template length, we know how far apart they
should be after assembly. The next chapter is on the use of read-pair
data for ordering contigs and checking assemblies and on the use of
consensus comparisons for finding joins
(_fpref(Ordering-and-Joining, Ordering and Joining Contigs, t)).


The next chapter is on checking assemblies and removing readings
(_fpref(Contig-Checking-and-Breaking, Checking Assemblies and Removing
Readings, t)). The following chapter describes gap4's methods for
suggesting experiments for helping to finish a sequencing project 
(_fpref(Experiments, Finishing Experiments, experiments)). Then we
describe the various consensus calculation algorithms, and the options
for creating consensus sequence files
(_fpref(Con-Calculation, The Consensus Calculation,
calc_consensus)). Next is the description of a set of miscellaneous
functions
(_fpref(gap4-misc, Miscellaneous functions, t)), followed by chapters on
the Results Manager
(_fpref(Results, Results Manager, results)),
Lists
(_fpref(Lists, Lists Introduction, lists)),
Notes
(_fpref(Notes, Notes, notes)),
Configuring gap4
(_fpref(Conf-Introduction, Options Menu, configure)),
gap4 Database Files
(_fpref(GapDB, Gap Database Files, gap4)),
_ifdef([[_unix]],[[Converting Old Databases
(_fpref(Convert, Converting Old Databases, t)),
]])Checking Databases for corruptions
(_fpref(Check Database, Check Database, check_db))
and Doctoring corrupted databases
(_fpref(Doctor Database, Doctor database, doctor_db)).

