@node ImportGFF
@section Importing GFF
@cindex GFF: importing from
@cindex Import GFF Annotations

Annotations within GFF files can be imported to Gap5 as annotations
(sometimes referred to as tags).  The ``Import GFF Annotatons''
function in the main File menu performs this task. Note that in order
for this to work the contigs should not have been edited or
complemented since the GFF file was created, otherwise the coordinates
in the GFF file will not match.

One caveat to this relates to sequence gaps.  By default consensus
gaps/padding characters are excluded from the contig consensus
sequences when counting GFF sequence coordinates.  In some cases we
may wish to support annotations in a gapped sequence, so the ``GFF
coordinates are already padded'' checkbox may be used to disable this
coordinate de-padding process.


_split()
@node ExportTags
@section Export Tags
@cindex Export Tags
@cindex Export GFF
@cindex GFF: exporting

This dialogue allows annotations (``tags'') to be written to disk as
a GFF version 3 file.

Currently this just uses the GFF ``remark'' type, but future plans
will be to support a more wide variety of GFF types. 

_picture(gap5_export_tags)

By default the coordinates generated are de-padded, such that ``*''s
in the consensus sequence are not counted when identifying the
coordinate of an annotation. This may be disabled by deselecting the
``Unpadded coordinates'' checkbox.

The object a tag is attached to is typically the contig it is within,
with the contig name being used in the first column of the GFF
file. This applies even for annotations place on a sequence rather
than the consensus. This feature may also be disabled by deselecting
the ``Map sequence tags to consensus'' checkbox.

Example GFF output follows, with ``...'' to denote lines truncated for
illustrative purposes.

@example
Contig6  gap5  remark  4745  4745  .  .  .  type=COMM;Note=Possible SNP?
Contig2  gap5  remark  3178  3196  .  .  .  type=OLIG;Note=Template%09xb63f10%0AOligoname%09??%0A...
@end example

Note we can see URL style percent encoding being used to avoid GFF
format metacharacters, as per the GFFv3 specification.


_split()
@node ExportSequences
@section Export Sequences
@cindex Export Sequences

This function exports sequence and annotation data from a Gap5
database to a variety of assembly formats.

_picture(gap5_export_sequences)

The fasta and fastq formats are basic sequence-only or sequence plus
quality, with no support for contigs or alignments.  The BAF, CAF, ACE
and SAM formats all hold assembly data and so are reasonably complete
representatives of data within Gap5. Note that ACE does not directly
support quality values and this export function does not create the
associated phdball file that houses this data.

There is also no direct support for BAM, however command line tools
like samtools or picard can convert the SAM file into BAM format. The
SAM file should already be sorted by position.

For SAM only there is an additional option: whether to fix mate-pair
information.  This will ensure that the MRNM (Mate Reference Name),
MPOS and ISIZE fields are filled out. Note that this considerably
slows down the speed of exporting, so it is disabled by default.

