@node tg_index
@section Creating databases
@cindex database creation
@cindex tg_index

Gap5 cannot directly work on assembly formats in their native format.
This is a substantial difference from things like BAM file viewers, but
the reason is simply that the other formats do not have data structured
in a manner that is suitable for in-place editing. Gap5 is first and
foremost an assembly editor.

Gap5 databases are currently created external to Gap5 using a
command-line program named @code{tg_index}.

@code{tg_index} [options] @i{input_file ...}

The most general usage is simply to specify one or more data files
(it accepts SAM/BAM, CAF, ACE, BAF, MAQ and in a more limited fashion
fasta/fastq), optionally specifying the output database with @code{-o}
@i{database_name}. This will then create a database suitable for editing
by Gap5.

Valid options are:

@table @code
@item -m
Input is MAQ format
@item -M
Input is MAQ-long format
@item -A
Input is ACE format
@item -B
Input is BAF format
@item -C
Input is CAF format
@item -f
Input is FASTA format
@item -F
Input is FASTQ format
@item -b
Input is BAM format
@item -s
Input is SAM format (with @@SQ headers)
@br
@item -u
Also store unmapped reads (SAM/BAM only)
@item -x
Also store auxillary records (SAM/BAM only)
@item -r
Store reference-position data (on)  (SAM/BAM only)
@item -R
Don't store reference-position data (SAM/BAM  only)
@item -D
Do not remove duplicates (SAM/BAM only)
@br
@item -p
Link read-pairs together (default on)
@item -P
Do not link read-pairs together
@br
@item -q @i{value}
Number of reads to queue in memory while waiting for pairing.  Use to
reduce memory  requirements for assemblies with lots of single reads at
the expense of running time.  0 for all in memory, suggest 1000000 if
used (default 0).
@br
@item -a
Append to existing db
@item -n
New contigs always (relevant if appending)
@br
@item -g
When appending to an existing db, assume the alignment was performed
against an ungapped copy of the existing consensus. Add gaps back in to
reads and/or consensus as needed.

@item -t
Index sequence names (default)
@item -T
Do not index sequence names

@item -z @i{value}
Specify minimum bin size (default is '4k')

@item -f
Fast mode: read-pair links are unidirectional large databases, eg n.seq
> 100 million. 

@item -d @i{data_types}
Only copy over certain data types. This is a comma separated list
containing one or more words from: seq, qual, anno, name, all or none 

@item -c @i{method}
Specifies the compression method. This shold be one of 'none', 'zlib' or
'lzma'. Zlib is the default.

@item -[1-9]
Use a fixed compression level from 1 to 9

@item -v @i{version_num}
Request a specific database formation version
@end table

To merge existing gap5 databases you will need to export either one or
both into an intermediate format (we suggest SAM) and then use tg_index
to import data again.

@node OpenDatabase
@section Opening/closing databases
@cindex Open database

The Open menu item is in the main gap5 File menu. It brings up a file
browser allowing selection of the gap5 database name. Databases consist
of two files - a main data block (.g5d) and a data index (.g5x).  It
does not matter which you choose as gap5 will open both.

Alternatively you can specify the database name on the command line when
launching gap5. Additionally this supports read-only access if you
specify the @code{-ro} flag. For example to open a database named Egu.0
(the old Gap4 convention implying version 0) in read-only mode we would
type:

@code{gap5 -ro Egu.0 &}


@node GapDB-Directories
@section Changing directories
@cindex Change directory

By default gap5 changes to the directory containing the database you
have open. All local output files specified (for example Save Consensus
or Export Sequences) will be relative to that location unless you use a
full pathname. The current working directory may be changed by using the
Change Direction dialogue, found in the main File menu.

@node CheckDatabase
@section Check Database
@cindex Check database

This function (which is available from the Gap5 File menu) is used to
perform a check on the logical consistency of the database.  No user
intervention is required. If the checks are passed the program will
report zero errors. Otherwise a report of each error is displayed.

_picture(gap5_check_database)

On a large database these checks can take a considerable amount of
time. The default is a thorough, but slow, check. However a faster mode
is available which only performs gross contig and contig-binning level
checks, omitting the per sequence and per annotation validation.

The dialogue also offers the choice of attempting to fix any problems
that are found. It is strongly recommended that you back the gap5
database up prior to performing fixes as depending on the nature of the
corruption the choices made may not necessarily be an improvement. Note
that this also may not fix every problem that is found, or the fixes
themselves may cause other errors to be found so it is best to recheck
again.

