_define(_gap5)

@c __include(gap5_org-t.texi)
@c __include(gap5_mini-t.texi)
@c __include(gap5_intro-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Gap5_DB
@chapter Gap5 Databases
_include(gap5_check_db-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Contig Selector and Comparator
@chapter Contig Selector / Comparator
@node Contig Selector
@section Contig Selector
@lowersections
_include(contig_selector-t.texi)
@raisesections

@page
_split()
@node Contig Comparator
@section Contig Comparator
@lowersections
_include(comparator-t.texi)
@raisesections

@page
_split()
@node Template Display
@chapter Template Display
_include(gap5_template-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Editor
@chapter Editing in Gap5
_include(gap5_contig_editor-t.texi)
 
@page
_split()
@node Restrict
@section Plotting Restriction Enzymes
_include(restrict_enzymes-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@chapter Importing and Exporting Data
@section Assembly
@node Assembly
@lowersections
_include(gap5_assembly-t.texi)
@raisesections

@page
_split
_include(gap5_export-t.texi)
 
@c @page
@c __split()
@c @node Ordering-and-Joining
@c @chapter Ordering and Joining Contigs
@c __include(contig_ordering-t.texi)
@c 

@page
_split()
@node Matches
@chapter Finding Sequence Matches
@node FIJ
@section Find Internal Joins
_include(gap5_fij-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Repeats
@section Find Repeats
_include(gap5_repeats-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Read Pairs
@section Find Read Pairs
_include(gap5_read_pairs-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Find Oligos
@section Sequence Search
_include(find_oligo-t.texi)

@page
_split
@node Disassembly and Data Deletion
_include(gap5_disassembly-t.texi)

@page
_split
@node Tidying up alignments
_include(gap5_shuffle-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Calculate Consensus
@chapter Calculating Consensus Sequences
_include(calc_consensus-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Misc
@chapter Other Miscellany
@lowersections
@node List Libraries
@chapter List Libraries
_include(list_libraries-t.texi)

@page
_split()
@node Results
@chapter Results Manager
_include(results-t.texi)
 
@page
_split()
@node Lists
@chapter Lists
_include(lists-t.texi)
@raisesections

@c 
@c @page
@c __split()
@c @node GapDB
@c @chapter Gap5 Database Files
@c __include(gap5_database-t.texi)
@c 
@c @page
@c __split()
@c @node Conf
@c @chapter Configuring
@c __include(configure-t.texi)
@c 
@c 
@c __split()
@c @node Gap5-Cline
@c @chapter Command Line Arguments
@c @cindex Command line arguments
@c 
@c @table @code
@c @cindex -bitsize 
@c @cindex bitsize (command line option)
@c @cindex 64-bit Gap4 databases
@c @item -bitsize
@c Specifies whether the database file size is 32-bit or
@c 64-bit. Practically speaking due to the use of signed numbers in
@c places and the restriction of 32-bit for the number of records in a
@c database (even when using @code{-bitsize 64} for 64-bit file offsets)
@c the practical limits are 2Gb filesize for @code{-bitsize 32} and
@c somewhere around about 100-million sequences for @code{-bitsize 64}. 
@c 
@c Gap4 only needs this option for creating new databases. The bit-size
@c of existing databases is automatically detected when they are opened.
@c 
@c Databases produced in 64-bit format are not compatible with older
@c versions of Gap4, but old and newly created 32-bit databases still work with
@c the 64-bit Gap4 (and are maintained in 32-bit format so editing them
@c will not invalidate their use by older Gap4s). The @code{copy_db}
@c program (_f p r e f (Man-copy_db, Copy_db, manpages)) can be used to
@c convert file formats.
@c 
@c @sp 1
@c @cindex -maxdb
@c @cindex maxdb (command line option)
@c @item -maxdb
@c Specifies the maximum number of readings plus contigs. This value is not
@c automatically adjusted whilst the program is running, but is not allowed to be
@c set to a value too small for the database to be opened. It controls the size
@c of some areas of memory (approximately @code{16*maxdb} bytes) used during
@c execution of gap. The default value is @code{8000}.
@c @sp 1
@c @cindex -maxseq
@c @cindex maxseq (command line option)
@c @item -maxseq
@c Specifies the maximum number of characters used in the concatenated consensus
@c sequences. This parameter is generally not required as the value is normally
@c computed and adjusted automatically. However a few functions (such as
@c assembly) still need to know a maximum size before hand. The default is
@c @code{100000} bases.
@c @sp 1
@c @item -ro
@c @itemx -read_only
@c @cindex -read_only
@c @cindex read_only (command line option)
@c Opens the database (if specified on the command line) in read only mode. This
@c does not apply to databases opened using the file browser.
@c @sp 1
@c @cindex -check
@c @cindex -nocheck
@c @cindex nocheck (command line option)
@c @cindex check (command line option)
@c @item -check
@c @itemx -no_check
@c Specifies whether to run the "Check Database" option when opening new
@c databases. @code{-check} forces this to always be done and @code{-nocheck}
@c forces it to never be done. By default Check Database is always performed when
@c opening databases in read-write mode and never performed when opening in
@c read-only mode.
@c @sp 1
@c @item -exec_notes
@c @itemx -no_exec_notes
@c @cindex -exec_notes
@c @cindex -no_exec_notes
@c @cindex security
@c Controls whether to search for and execute any Notes of type
@c @code{OPEN} or @code{CLOS}. This may be an important security measure
@c if you are using foreign databases. Gap4 defaults to -no_check_notes.
@c @sp 1
@c @item -rawdata_note
@c @itemx -no_rawdata_note
@c @cindex -rawdata_note
@c @cindex -no_rawdata_note
@c Controls whether to make use of the @code{RAWD} note type for
@c specifying the trace file search path. Defaults to -rawdata_note.
@c @sp 1
@c @item -csel
@c @itemx -no_csel
@c @cindex -csel
@c @cindex -no_csel
@c Controls whether to automatically start up the contig selector when
@c opening a new gap4 database. In some cases (such as when dealing with
@c many EST clusters each in their own contig) the contig selector is not
@c a practical tool; this simply offers a way of speeding up database
@c opening. Defaults to -csel.
@c @sp 1
@c @item --
@c Treat this as the last command line option. Only useful if the database name
@c is specified and the name starts with a minus character (not
@c recommended!).
@c @end table
@c 
@c __ifdef([[_unix]],[[
@c @page
@c __split()
@c @node Convert
@c @chapter Converting Old Databases
@c __include(gap5_convert-t.texi)
@c ]])

_undefine(_gap5)
