@cindex Find read pairs
@cindex Read pairs

This function is used to check the positions and orientations of
readings taken from the same templates. 
It is invoked from the gap5 View menu.

For each template the relative
position of its readings and the contigs they are in are examined. This
analysis can give information about the relative order, separation and
orientations of contigs and also show possible problems in the data.
The search can be over the whole database or a subset of contigs named
in a list (_fpref(Lists, Lists, lists)) 
or file of file names. The results are written to the Output
Window and plotted in the Contig Comparator 
(_fxref(Contig Comparator, Contig Comparator, comparator)).
Read pair information is also used to colour code the results displayed in the
Template Display 
(_fpref(Template-Display, Template Display, template)).

Note that during assembly the template names and lengths are copied from
the experiment files into the gap database. _fxref(Formats-Exp,
Experiment Files, exp) The accuracy of the lengths will depend upon some
size selection being performed during the cloning procedures.

_picture(gap5_find_read_pairs)

Users choose to process "all contigs" or a subset selected from a file
of file names ("file") or a list ("list"). If either of the subset
options is selected the "browse" button will be activated and can be
clicked on to call up a file or list browser dialogue.

_split()
@node ReadPair-Display
@subsection Find Read Pairs Graphical Output
@cindex Find read pairs: display

The contig comparator is used to plot all templates with readings that span
contigs. That is, the lines drawn on the contig comparator are a visual
representation of the relationship (orientation and overlap) between contigs.
When a template spans more than two contigs, all the combinations of pairs of
contigs are plotted. However such cases are uncommon.

_lpicture(gap5_rp_comparator)

The figure above shows a typical Contig Comparator plot which includes
several types of result in addition to those from Read Pair analysis.

The lines for the read-pairs 
are, by default, shown in blue. The length of the line is the average
length of the two readings within the pair. The slope of the line represents
the relative orientation of the two readings. If they are both the same
orientation (including both complemented) the line is drawn from top left to
bottom right, otherwise the line is drawn from top right to bottom left.

Clicking with the right mouse button on a read pair line brings up a
menu containing, amongst other things, "Invoke join editor"
(_fpref(Editor-Joining, The Join Editor, contig_editor)).  This will
bring up the Join Editor with the two contigs shown end to end.
