@cindex getABIfield: man page
@unnumberedsec NAME

getABIfield --- extract arbitrary components from an ABI file

@unnumberedsec SYNOPSIS

@code{getABIfield} [@code{OPTIONS}] @i{filename} [@code{Field-ID} [
@code{Count}]] ...

@unnumberedsec DESCRIPTION

The @code{getABIfield} command extracts specified blocks from an ABI
file and displays them in a variety of formats. The ABI file may be
considered as a directory structure with files (data blocks) contained
within it. Supply just the ABI filename as an argument will give a
listing of the blocks.

To extract specific data one or more ``name count'' pairs need to be
specified.

@unnumberedsec OPTIONS

@table @asis
@item @code{-a}
    Dump all blocks.

@item @code{-D} @i{separator}
    Sets the output field separator for elements within a date and
    time format. Dates default to ``yyyy/mm/dd'' format and times default
    to ``hh:mm:ss.xx''.

@item @code{-F} @i{separator}
    Sets the output field separator to be a specified character.
    This defaults to space.

@item @code{-f} @i{format}
    Reformat the data to a specific style. By default the data is
    listed in the format specified within the ABI file.
    @i{format} should be chosen of @code{1}(1-byte integer),
    @code{4}(2-byte integer), @code{5}(4-byte integer),
    @code{7}(4-byte real), @code{8}(8-byte real), @code{10}(date),
    @code{11}(time), @code{18}(Pascal-string), @code{19}(C-string).

@item @code{-h}
    Displays data in hex format. By default the output format will be
    chosen based on the data type (eg string, integer, floating
    point).

@item @code{-I} @i{fofn}
    Instead of reading the single file specified on the argument list
    this reads a list of filenames from @i{fofn}. If @i{fofn} is ``-''
    then the file of filenames is read from 'stdin'.

@item @code{-L} @i{separator}
    Sets the line separator between multiple blocks listed within a
    single file. Defaults to newline.

@item @code{-l}
    Sets the output field separator to be a newline.

    Query mode. Here no output is displayed, but it simply returns true
    or false depending on whether any of requested comments were found.

@item @code{-r}
    Displays data in raw byte format.
    
@item @code{-t}
    Enable tagged output format. Each name/count pair are listed on a
    single line in the format ``filename name count data...''.
@end table

@unnumberedsec EXAMPLES

To extract the run dates in a tagged format for all the ab1 files in
the current working directory:

@example
ls *.ab1 | getABIfield -t -I - RUND
@end example

To see the order of the processed data channels (e.g. ``GATC'') on a
single file:

@example
getABIfield 3150.ab1 FWO_
@end example

To see the processed trace data for the first channel (e.g. ``G'')
with one sample point per line:

@example
getABIfield -l 3150.ab1 DATA 9
@end example

To obtain the version numbers of the various trace processing steps:

@example
getABIfield -t 3150.ab1 SVER 1 SVER 2 SVER 3
@end example

@unnumberedsec SEE ALSO

_fxref(Man-get_comment, get_comment(1), get_comment.1)
_fxref(Formats-Scf, scf(4), formats)
