@cindex hash_tar: man page
@unnumberedsec NAME

hash_tar --- Adds a hash table index to a tar file

@unnumberedsec SYNOPSIS

@code{hash_tar} [OPTIONS] @i{tarfile} > @i{tarfile}.hash
@br
@code{hash_tar} -A [OPTIONS] @i{tarfile} >> @i{tarfile}

@unnumberedsec DESCRIPTION

@code{hash_tar} adds an index to a tar file so that random access may
be performed on it. It is a successor to the @code{index_tar}
program.

The index is a hash table which may be appended, prepended or stored
in a separate file. Then the @code{hash_list} and @code{hash_extract}
programs may be used to query the contents and to extract contents
from the indexed tar archive. Note that it's not possible to add to
such tar archives without also having to rebuild the index.

Various @i{io_lib} based tools also support transparent reading out of
tar files when indexed using this tool, so this provides a quick and
easy way to remove the clutter of thousands of small trace files on
disk.

In separate file mode the hash index is stored in its own file. It's
the most flexible method as it means that the tar file can be modified
and appended to with ease provided that the hash index is
recomputed. In order for this to work the hash index file also needs
to store the filename of its associated tar file (see the -a option).

In append mode the hash index is assumed to be appended on the end of
the tar file itself. As tar files normally end in a blank block this
does not damage the tar and @code{tar tvf} will still work
correctly. However appending to the tar file will cause problems.

In prepend mode the hash index comes first and the tar follows. This
breaks normal tar commands, but is the the fastest way to retrieve
data (it avoids a read and a seek call compared to append mode).

For space saving reasons it's possible to add a header and a footer to
each entry too. In this case a named entry from the tar file is
prepended or appended at extraction time.

@unnumberedsec OPTIONS

@table @asis
@item @code{-a} @i{archive_filename}
    Use this if reading from stdin and you wish to create a hash index
    that is to be stored as a separate file.

@item @code{-A}
    Append mode. No archive name will be stored in the index and so
    the extraction tools assume the index is appended to the same file
    as the archive itself.

@item @code{-b}
    Store the ``base name'' of the tar file names. That is if the tar
    holds file @i{a/b/c} then the item held in the index will be @i{c}.

@item @code{-d}
    Index directory names too. (Most likely a useless feature!)

@item @code{-f} @i{name}
    Set tar entry 'name' to be a file footer

@item @code{-h} @i{name}
    Set tar entry 'name' to be a file header

@item @code{-O}
    Prepend mode. It is assumed that all offsets within the archive
    file start from the end of the index (ie the index is the first
    bit in the file).

@item @code{-v}
    Verbose mode.

@end table

@unnumberedsec EXAMPLES

The most common usage is just to append an index to an existing tar
file. Then extract a file from it.

@example
hash_tar -A file.tar >> file.tar
hash_extract file.tar xyzzy/plugh > plugh
@end example

For absolute maximum speed maybe you wish to prepend the hash
index. This speeds up the ``magic number'' detection and avoids
unnecessary seeks.

@example
hash_tar -O file.tar > file.tar.hash
cat file.tar.hash file.tar > hashedfile.tar
@end example

Finally, if we have a tar file of Experiment Files maybe we wish to
add a footer indicating a date and comment to each experiment file so
that upon extraction we get a concatenation of the original experiment
file and the footer.

@example
(echo "CC   Comment";date "+DT   %Y-%m-%d") > exp_foot
tar rf file.tar exp_foot
hash_tar -f exp_foot -A file.tar >> file.tar
# Now test:
hash_extract file.tar xyzzy.exp > xyzzy.exp
tail -2 xyzzy.exp
@end example

@unnumberedsec SEE ALSO

_fxref(Formats-Exp, ExperimentFile(4), formats)
_fxref(Man-hash_list, hash_list(1), hash_list.1)
_fxref(Man-hash_extract, hash_extract(1), hash_extract.1)
@code{Read}(4)
