@cindex Hidden data
@cindex data hidden

In general sequences obtained from machines contain segments such as
vector sequence and poor quality data that need either to be removed or
ignored during assembly and editing. In our package we do not remove
such segments but instead we mark them so that the programs can deal
with them appropriately. In gap4 such data is referred to as "hidden".
The positions to hide are determined initially by preprocessing programs
such as vector_clip (_fpref(Vector_Clip, Screening Against Vector
Sequences, vector_clip)) and qclip
(_fpref(Man-qclip, qclip, manpages)).


The hidden data can be revealed in the Contig Editor by toggling the
Cutoffs button (_fpref(Editor-Cutoffs, Adjusting the Cutoff
data, contig_editor)); can be used to search for possible joins between
contigs (_fpref(FIJ, Find Internal Joins, fij)), and can be included in
the consensus sequence (_fpref(Con-Extended, Extended consensus,
calc_consensus)) to be used by external screening programs.  For these
cases the program can distinguish data that is hidden because it is
vector and data that is hidden because it is of poor quality: only poor quality
data is included.

The position of hidden data can be changed interactively in the Contig
Editor. In addition the Double Strand function (_fpref(Double Strand,
Double stranding, exp_suggest)) will reduce the amount of hidden data
for readings that cover single stranded regions of contigs, if the data
aligns well with that on the other strand.

