@cindex init_exp: man page
@unnumberedsec NAME

init_exp --- create and initialise an Experiment File

@unnumberedsec SYNOPSIS

@code{init_exp} [@code{-}(@code{abi}|@code{alf}|@code{scf}|@code{pln})]
[@code{-output} @i{file}] [@code{-name} @i{entry_name}] [@code{-conf}] @i{file}

@unnumberedsec DESCRIPTION

@code{init_exp} initiates an Experiment File for a binary trace file or
a plain sequence file. The Experiment File created
contains the @code{ID}, @code{EN}, @code{LN}, @code{LT} and @code{SQ}
lines.

The experiment file is, by default, sent to standard output, unless an
output file is specified using the @code{-output} option. The default
entry name for the Experiment File is derived from the filenames used.
If an output file has been specified, then this is taken as the
@code{EN} field. Otherwise the input file name is used. The user can
override the default by using the @code{-name} option.

@unnumberedsec OPTIONS

@table @asis
@item @code{-abi}, @code{-alf}, @code{-scf}, @code{-pln}
    Specify an input file format. This is not usually required as
    @code{init_exp} will automatically determine the correct input file
    type. This option is supplied incase the automatic determination is
    incorrect (which is possible, but has never been observed).

@item @code{-output} @i{file}
    The experiment file will be written to @i{file} instead of standard
    output. Additionally the value of the @code{EN} and @code{ID}
    fields, assuming @code{-name} has not been specified, will be @i{file}.

@item @code{-name} @i{name}
    Sets the @code{ID} and @code{EN} fields to @i{name}, regardless of
    the output filename used.

@item @code{-conf}
    Fills out the @code{AV} field with the quality values found in the SCF
    file.

@end table

@unnumberedsec NOTES

This program was formerly known as @code{expGetSeq}.

@unnumberedsec SEE ALSO

_fxref(Formats-Exp, ExperimentFile(4), formats)
@code{Read}(4)
