@cindex List Libraries
@cindex Insert Sizes
@cindex Read groups: SAM RG tags

The List Libraries window is perhaps misnamed as it handles arbitrary
groups of reads, possibly due to the use of multiple libraries,
multiple instrument types or simply multiple lanes on a single
instrument. For SAM/BAM files this informations comes from the
@code{@@RG} header lines. For other formats Gap5 typically makes use of
the input filename to group data together.

_picture(gap5_list_libraries)

The basic plot shows a list of library names and how frequently read
pairs have been identified as matching to the same contig. This is
computed at the time of import via tg_index and so will not be updated
on contig joining or breakage. The @i{Type} field indicates
the instrument platform type (for example Illumina or 454), although
this is often absent from the input BAM files.

The @i{Insert size} and standard deviation (@i{s.d.}) are derived from
the sequence alignments, with assumptions of an approximately Gaussian
distribution. While not entirely accurate this is typically sufficient
for most libraries when viewed in a summary table. Finally the
@i{Orientation} field indicates the relative orientation in which most
of the read-pairs have been assembled. This will be one of
``@code{-> <-}'', ``@code{<- ->}'' or ``@code{-> -> / <- <-}'' to
indicate the relative orientations of the read-pair. Whether the observed
orientation is correct will depend on the particular sequencing
strategy used.

Underneath the list is a histogram of observed insert sizes for the
currently selected library. The graph is currently very rudimentary
with no controls, but it will auto-scale to fit the data.
