@cindex makeSCF: man page
@unnumberedsec NAME

makeSCF --- Converts trace files to SCF files.

@unnumberedsec SYNOPSIS

@code{makeSCF} [@code{-8}] [@code{-2}] [@code{-3}]
-(@code{abi}|@code{alf}|@code{scf}|@code{pln}) @i{input_name}
[@code{-compress} @i{compression_mode}] [@code{-normalise}
[@code{-output} @i{output_name}]

@unnumberedsec DESCRIPTION

@code{MakeSCF} converts trace files to the SCF format. It can input ABI 373A,
Pharmacia A.L.F., or previously created SCF files (although converting from
SCF to SCF serves no useful purpose!). 

@unnumberedsec OPTIONS

@table @asis
@item @code{-8}
    Force conversion to 8 bit sample data. This shrinks the size of SCF
    files using 16 bit sample values, but at a loss of resolution. For trace
    display purposes this accuracy loss is acceptable.

@item @code{-2}
    Force the output to be written in SCF version 2. By default the
    latest version (3) is used.

@item @code{-3}
    Force the output to be written in SCF version 3. This is the default.

@item @code{-s}
    Silent mode. This prevents the output of the copyright message.

@item @code{-abi}, @code{-alf}, @code{-scf}, @code{-any}
    Specify an input file format. A file format of "any" will force
    @code{makeSCF} to automatically determine the correct input file type.

@item @code{-compress} @i{compression_mode}
    Requests the generated SCF file to be passed through a separate compression
    program before writing to disk. @code{makeSCF} does not contain any
    compression algorithms itself. It requires the appropriately named tool to
    be on the system and in the user's @r{PATH}.
    Valid responses for @i{compression_mode} are (in order of best compression
    first) @code{bzip}, @code{gzip}, @code{compress} and @code{pack}. Note
    that @code{bzip} at present is only bzip version 1 and that bzip version 2
    is incompatible.

@item @code{-normalise}
    Performs some very simple trace normalisation. This subtracts the
    background signal (by defining the background signal to be the lowest of
    the four traces) and rescales the peak heights, averaging the height over
    a `window' of 1000 trace sample points. This option may be useful
    for some unscaled ALF files.

@item @code{-output} @i{file}
    Specifies the filename for the SCF file to be produced. If this is not
    specified the SCF file will be sent to standard output.
@end table

@unnumberedsec EXAMPLES

To convert an ABI 373A trace:

@example
@code{makeSCF -8 -abi trace.abi -output trace.scf}
@end example

To convert an ALF archive to individual SCF files (Warning! this 
will most certainly fail if your clone names contain spaces):

@example
@code{alfsplit trace.alf | awk '/^Clone/ @{print $3 "ALF"@}' > trace.files}

@code{sh -c 'for i in `cat trace.files`;do makeSCF -alf $i -output}
@code{    $i.scf;done}
@end example

@unnumberedsec NOTES

If ABI and A.L.F files are edited before input to makeSCF the contents of
the resulting SCF files are unpredictable.
To use Pharmacia A.L.F. files the @code{alfsplit} program should first
be used. Then @code{makeSCF} should be run on each of the split files.
See the example above.

@unnumberedsec SEE ALSO

_fxref(Formats-Scf, scf(4), formats)
_fxref(Man-convert_trace, convert_trace(1), convert_trace.1)
_fxref(Man-eba, eba(1), eba.1)

