@menu
* Mutation-Detection-Introduction:: Mutation Detection Introduction
* Mutation-Detection-Methods:: Mutation Detection Programs
* Mutation-Detection-Reference-Data:: Mutation Detection Reference Data
* Mutation-Detection-Reference-Sequences:: Mutation Detection Reference Sequences
* Mutation-Detection-Reference-Traces:: Mutation Detection Reference Traces
* Using-The-Template-Display-With-Mutation-Data:: Using The Template Display With Mutation Data
* Configuring-The-Gap4-Editor-For-Mutation-Data:: Configuring The Gap4 Editor For Mutation Data
* Using-The-Gap4-Editor-With-Mutation-Data:: Using The Gap4 Editor With Mutation Data
* Processing-Batches-Of-Mutation-Data-Trace-Files:: Processing Batches Of Mutation Data Trace Files
* Processing-Batches-Of-Mutation-Data-Trace-Files-Using-Pregap4:: Processing Batches Of Mutation Data Trace Files Using Pregap4
* Discussion-Of-Mutation-Data-Processing:: Discussion Of Mutation Data Processing
@end menu

The original version of these methods was described in 
@cite{James K Bonfield, Cristina Rada and Rodger Staden, 
"Automated detection of point
mutations using fluorescent sequence trace subtraction", Nucleic Acids
Res.  26, 3404-3409, 1998.}. The more recent work has been done by Mark
Jordan and James Bonfield with advice from Graham Taylor, Andrew
Wallace, Will Wang and others.

_split()
@node Mutation-Detection-Introduction
@section Introduction to mutation detection
@cindex Mutation detection: introduction
@cindex detection of mutations: introduction

Our methods for detecting mutations are based on the alignment and comparison
of the fluorescent traces produced by Sanger DNA sequencing. To use clinical
terminology, samples from patients are compared to standard reference traces.
Patient and reference traces should be produced using the same primers and 
sequencing chemistry, ideally from both strands of the DNA. The data shown
in the examples below is from exon 11 of the BRCA1 gene.

The basic idea is illustrated in the following two figures which are screen
dumps from our program gap4(_fpref(Gap4-Introduction, Gap4 introduction, gap4)). The first shows
a sample containing a point mutation and the second contains a heterozygous
base position. The displays are bisected vertically: at the top left is the 
sample trace
from one strand of the DNA, below that the reference trace for that 
strand, and underneath the difference between these traces which is 
obtained by 
subtracting one from the other.
On the right is corresponding data from the other DNA strand (shown 
complemented).

_lpicture(mut_traces_point)

Figure 1. Top and bottom strand differences for a point mutation.

_lpicture(mut_traces_het)

Figure 2. Top and bottom strand differences for a heterozygous base.

As can be seen, although no vertical scaling is performed the difference trace
is quite flat or is consistently either above or below the mid-line, except 
at the sites of mutations. Near these are strong peaks, but notice that only
for the mutated base are there peaks both above and below the mid-line. The
context effects caused by the mutation produce peaks only in one direction.

It is perhaps necessary to point out that analysis of the traces is essential
because base callers make mistakes: they can assign the wrong base types and
also assign single bases where the DNA is heterozygous. An example of the latter
can be observed in Figure 2: on one strand the base caller has assigned
a "-" symbol at position 251, at least indicating uncertainty, but on the
other strand it has assigned "T". The DNA is clearly heterozygous at this
position. This means that simply looking for differences between patient
sequences and reference sequences will cause point mutations and heterozygous
bases to be missed (of course base calling errors will also create
false differences).

These trace displays alone are very useful for visual inspection of data 
and are all
some users want. However we also have programs which automatically analyse 
the trace differences and tag the bases which have significant peaks as possible
sites of mutation.


Trace viewing is initiated from within the gap4 editor(_fpref(Editor, Editing in gap4, contig_editor)).
Each record in the editor shows an individual reading with its number and name
at the left. Negative numbers denote readings which have been complemented.
Several sequences have special status. At the top is a sequence labelled with
a letter S at the left edge. This is the reference sequence, here the EMBL
entry HSLBRCA1 which covers the entirety of the BRCA1 gene. The numbering
at the top of the display corresponds to positions in this reference sequence.
The program has also coloured (green) all exons on the reference sequence.
The bottom DNA sequence in the editor is labelled "CONSENSUS". For mutation
detection work this sequence is forced to be identical to the reference.
Below the CONSENSUS sequence is the amino acid sequence for the reference.
This is calculated on the fly using the feature table of the reference 
sequence and so translates only exons and in their correct reading frames.
Two other sequences (near the top) are labelled R and F. These are the readings
providing the reverse
and forward reference traces for this segment of the data.

_lpicture(mut_contig_editor5)

Figure 3. A set of aligned sequence readings displayed in the gap4 editor.

At the very bottom of the editor is an information line which is used to
display data about items touched by the mouse cursor. Here it is showing
data about one of the positions tagged as possibly being heterozygous. 
It includes the
observed base types (G and A) and the scores achieved by the automated analysis.

The editor can be set to show only differences between readings and the 
reference; all matching bases appear as dots. For example, Figure 4.
shows the same data as Figure 3, but with the editor set to show differences,
and the information line showing details about a possible mutation.


_lpicture(mut_contig_editor_dis5)

Figure 4. An alternative view of aligned sequence readings in the gap4 editor.



One column contains several bases tagged in  red, signifying possible
heterozygotes, and some in orange denoting possible point mutations. 
During visual inspection the program can be made to move the cursor from 
one tag to the next and to display the aligned traces as shown
above in Figures 1 and 2.

It is also possible to have positive controls for displaying the trace 
differences; i.e. reference traces which contain the mutation. In this case the traces
appear as shown in figure 5. Here the forward and reverse positive controls
are shown to the right of the normal plots. In Figure 5 the positive control
difference plots are quite flat hence, in this case, providing confirmation 
of the presence of the heterozygous base.

_lpicture(mut_traces_positive)

Figure 5. Top and bottom strand differences and positive control for a heterozygous base.

As mentioned above the package contains programs which can automatically
compare the traces and their reference sequences. The output from these
programs are the tags shown in the editor. Users can check the traces at
these positions using the displays shown in Figures 1, 2 and 5; if necessary
removing or adding tags. Alternatively users can rely entirely on visual
inspection and create all tags themselves.

Once all the mutations are correctly tagged the program can produce a report
which includes the reading names, mutation positions relative to the reference
sequence, the actual change, its effect, and the evidence. An example is shown
below in Figure 6.

@example
@group
@cartouche

001321_11aF 33885T>Y (silent F) (strand - only)
001321_11aF 34407G>K (expressed E>[ED]) (strand - only)
001321_11cF 35512T>Y (silent L) (double stranded)
001321_11cF 35813C>Y (expressed P>[PL]) (double stranded)
001321_11dF 36314A>R (expressed E>[EG]) (double stranded)
001321_11eF 36749A>R (expressed K>[KR]) (double stranded)
001321_11eF 37313T>K (noncoding) (strand - only)
000256_11eF 36749A>G (expressed K>R) (double stranded)

@end cartouche
@end group
@end example
Figure 6. How gap4 reports mutations.
@cindex mutation report


Here the first record is for reading 001321_11aF, position 33885, T changed
to T and C (i.e. is heterozygous) to produce no amino acid change, with evidence coming only from
the complementary strand. The last record is for reading 000256_11eF, position
36749, A changed to G, producing an amino acid change K to R, with evidence
from both strands of the sequence. The penultimate record denotes a 
heterozygote in a noncoding region.

_split()
@node Mutation-Detection-Methods
@subsection Mutation Detection Programs

The software handles batches of trace data from sequencing instruments. It 
performs
all processing except base calling (although it can employ third party
programs such as phred for this step). This includes file format
conversions, quality clipping, scanning for mutations and heterozygotes,
multiple sequence alignment, easy visual inspection of traces, production of
reports, and the accumulation and storage of readings and traces. The
software also handles the initialisation/configuration of standard
reference files and databases for any project. The two main programs are
pregap4 and gap4. Pregap4 (_fpref(Pregap4-Introduction, Pregap4 introduction, pregap4))
prepares data for gap4 by automatically using
a variety of smaller programs, including those used to search for mutations:
mutscan (_fpref(Pregap4-Modules-Mutation Scanner, Mutation Scanner, t).
Gap4 (_fpref(Gap4-Introduction, Gap4 introduction, gap4))
is used to store the aligned readings, to view the sequences and
traces, and to produce a report listing the observed mutations.

Any number of sequences can be processed in a  single run, and for each
individual  patient sample the  operation  is generally
performed in two steps. First, via pregap4, the traces are aligned and
compared to the reference traces and any possible mutations or heterozygous
bases marked.  Secondly,  the data  is transfered into a gap4 database
from  where  users can   visually check   the differences between  the
reference and patient traces.

The program mutscan (_fpref(Pregap4-Modules-Mutation Scanner, Mutation
Scanner,t)) can automatically compare patient and reference traces to
find point mutations and heterozygous bases.  Users can set parameters
which control the sensistivity of the algorithms (and hence which
determine the ratio of false negative and positive results). Mutscan
adds tags of type ``mutation'' or ``heterozygous'' to the patient
files. The tags contain the numerical scores achieved at the site of
the reported base changes, and they can be viewed via the gap4
editor(_fpref(Editor, Editing in gap4, contig_editor)).  Mutscan is
normally run via pregap4 (_fpref(Pregap4-Introduction, Pregap4
introduction, pregap4)).

The description of the programs given below is presented in reverse order of
use i.e. gap4 then pregap4, but first we give further details about the use
of reference data.


_split()
@node Mutation-Detection-Reference-Data
@subsection Mutation Detection Reference Data

The mutation detection methods require reference traces and optionally 
reference sequences. Reference traces are used for automatic mutation
detection and for visual inspection of trace differences. Reference sequences
are used in gap4 to provide a base numbering standard, and if required to
provide feature table entries to control translation and mutation reporting.

@menu
* Mutation-Detection-Reference-Sequences:: Reference Sequences
* Mutation-Detection-Reference-Traces:: Reference Traces
@end menu


@node Mutation-Detection-Reference-Sequences
@subsection Reference Sequences
@cindex reference sequences
@cindex mutation detection: reference sequences

Reference sequences are used in gap4 
(_fpref(Gap4-Introduction, Gap4 introduction, gap4)).
Here they can be used to define a
numbering system independent of gaps introduced to produce alignments.
The numbering can start at any point in the reference sequence. If the
reference sequence is entered with a feature table the features are
converted to tags and can be used to control translation of the sequence
in the contig editor. For mutation detection work the reference sequence
and feature table
enable mutations to be
reported using positions defined by the reference sequence, and also
allows the effect of the mutations to be noted. 
Gap4 is able to store entries from the EMBL sequence library complete with
their feature tables. These feature tables are converted to gap4
database annotations (tags), which means that they can be selectively
displayed in the template display and editor, and used to translate only
the exons (in the correct reading frame). Obviously it may be useful to
augment the feature tables with the sites of known polymorphisms or deleterious
mutations so that they can be displayed in gap4 as landmarks.
When it comes to producing a
report of the observed mutations the feature table is used to work out
if a mutation is expressed and if so what the amino acid change is.
Additional tags can be created to specify the positions of the primers
or restriction sites used to obtain data covering segments of the sequence.
For any project the reference sequence need only be set up once. Either
project databases can be started with the reference sequence already 
configured or the reference can be assembled along with the reading data.
The reference sequence can be designated (or reassigned) as follows.
In pregap4 (_fpref(Pregap4-Introduction, Pregap4 introduction, pregap4))
it can be named in the module "Reference Traces". In the
gap4 editor it can be set by right clicking on its name. Once set it should
appear labelled "S" at the left edge of the editor.

@node Mutation-Detection-Reference-Traces
@subsection Reference Traces
@cindex reference traces
@cindex mutation detection: reference traces

References traces are used by the automatic mutation detection program
mutscan (_fpref(Pregap4-Modules-Mutation Scanner, Mutation Scanner,
t), and by the trace difference display in the gap4
editor(_fpref(Editor, Editing in gap4, contig_editor)).  
Ideally forward and reverse reference traces should be
available and should be obtained using the same primers and sequencing
chemistry as the patient data.  From the "settings" menu of the editor
the trace display can be set to "Auto-Diff traces". Once this is
activated, whenever the user double clicks on a base in the editor
sequence display, not only is the reading's trace displayed, but also
its designated reference trace plus the difference between them. If its
complementary reading is available, its trace and reference trace and
their differences are also displayed.  These
trace displays and the editing cursor scroll in synch.

_lpicture(mut_traces_het)

Top and bottom strand differences for a heterozygous base.


The preferred way of assigning reference traces to readings is by use of
"naming conventions"; that is to have a simple set of rules which
control the names given to the trace files. It can be seen in the
figures showing the editor that forward and reverse readings from the
same patient have names with a common root but which end either F or
R. This both ties the two together (so the software knows which is the
corresponding 
complementary trace when the user double clicks on a reading) and also
enables the association of readings and their reference traces. Once a
convention has been adopted the rules can be defined for pregap4 by
loading them via the "Load Naming Scheme" option in its File menu
(_fpref(Pregap4-Naming, Pregap4 Naming Schemes, pregap4)). For
any batch of readings the reference traces are defined within pregap4's
"Reference Traces" module.  Note that this mode of operation, by
allowing the specification of only one forward and one reverse trace,
limits each batch of traces processed to those which correspond to a
given pair of reference traces. The size of the batch is unlimited. 


The alternative way of specifying the reference traces is to right click
on their names in the editor. This also allows positive trace controls to be 
specified (which is not possible in pregap4).



_split()

@node Using-The-Template-Display-With-Mutation-Data
@subsection Using The Template Display With Mutation Data


_lpicture(mut_template_all)

Figure 7. The template display showing the whole of the BRCA1 gene (exons in green).

The view obtained from the Template display and shown in Figure 7 is not of 
practical use but serves here to illustrate the overall
arrangement of the data for our chosen example the BRCA1 gene. This figure
shows the entirety of the EMBL entry HSLBRCA1 with its exons marked
in green. Only exon 11 has patient trace data stacked above it.

_lpicture(mut_template_reads)


Figure 8. A zoomed-in version of the data shown in Figure 7. 

Here we can see all the readings
covering exon 11. Forward readings are light blue, reverse readings orange, 
primers are 
marked in yellow, mutations in red and orange.
A common mutation appears in the leftmost set of readings and illustrates
the value of using the template display for visualising the overall pattern 
of the tagged mutations. 

@node Configuring-The-Gap4-Editor-For-Mutation-Data
@subsection Configuring The Gap4 Editor For Mutation Data

The current version of the gap4 editor contains very many options that are
not needed for mutation data. Given sufficient demand a version tailored for
mutation studies could be produced. For now it might make it easier to understand
the program if its origin as a genome assembly program is borne in mind.
Here we outline the options and settings relevant to mutation studies.
The assignment of reference sequence and traces is described above. From the
editor they can be set by right clicking on the reading names.

Gap4 enables segments of sequences to be annotated (or tagged). Each tag 
has a type (eg primer) and each type has an associated colour. Each instance
of a tag can include editable text. This text can be viewed and edited by right
clicking on the tag and selecting "Edit tag", after which a text box will appear.
Gap4 can display annotations/tags as background colour and the user can specify
which tag types are shown. For mutation studies the following tag types may
usefully be activated, and all others turned off. Using the "Set Active Tags"
option in the "Settings" menu first click on "Clear all".  
Then click on "primer".
To add further types
you must hold down the "Ctrl" key on the keyboard while clicking. 
Now scroll down and click on "Mutation", "Heterozygous" and "FEATURE CDS".
Add any others required, then click "OK".

The following configurations are performed via the "Settings" menu.

Gap4 has three consensus generation algorithms. When using a reference
sequence it is convenient if the consensus shown in the editor is forced
to be the same as the reference. This will be the case if either
the "Weighted base frequencies" or the "Confidence values" consensus algorithms
are being used. This selection is made using the "Consensus algorithm" option.

Translations are shown in what gap4 refers to as the "Status" line.
To enable automatic translation of the exons defined in the reference sequence,
in the "Status Line" option set "Translate using feature tables".

To enable automatic display of trace diferences, in the "Trace Display" option
set "Auto-Diff Traces".

To show only the base differences between the consensus/reference, set 
"Highlight Disagreements". These can be shown by dots or colour.

To show base confidence values set "Show reading quality" and also make sure
that the value in the box labelled "Q" at the top left of the editor is set
to 0 or greater.

To force forward and reverse reading pairs to be shown in adjacent records in
the editor set "Group readings by templates" (NB this assumes that an appropriate
naming scheme has been used).

If a reference sequence is assigned, the numbering at the top of the sequence
will reflect the base positions in that sequence. Any pads in the reference
sequence are ignored. If no reference sequence is assigned, the numbering will 
ignore pads if the "Show unpadded positions" option is activated.

At the bottom of the "Settings" menu is an option to "Save settings". Use of
this will mean that the current configuration will be set automatically next
time the editor is used (and hence the steps just described only need to be
performed once).

@node Using-The-Gap4-Editor-With-Mutation-Data
@subsection Using The Gap4 Editor With Mutation Data

The current version of the editor has a fixed width and a maximum
height. If too many sequences are present at any position a vertical
scrollbar on the right edge can be used to move them up and down. The
CONSENSUS line will always be visible, but at present, the reference
sequence is scrolled along with all the other sequences and so may
disappear. Horizontal scrolling is achieved in the usual ways, plus by use of
the >, >> and <, << buttons. The reading names can be moved left and right 
using the scrollbar above them.

Configure the editor as described above.

The traces for readings (and their reverse) can be examined over their full
length one at a time by simply double clicking on them then scrolling
along. Any 
mutations observed can be labelled by right clicking on the base in the editor 
display and invoking
the "Create tag" option. This brings up a dialogue box. At the top is a
button marked "Type:comment"; clicking on this will bring up another dialogue
with a list of all the tag types; choose the appropriate one ("Heterozygous"
or "Mutation"). There are obviously many advantages to examining the traces
like this using gap4. However, if the automated mutation detection methods
are trusted, or used in way that makes them trustworthy for the type of
study being undertaken, then there are quicker ways of examining the data.

The "Next Search" button at the top of the editor gives access to many types
of search, one of which is "tag type". If this is selected a button appears
labelled "Tag type COMM(Comment)". Clicking on this will bring up a dialogue
showing all the available tag types. If the user selects, say "Mutation", 
each time the "Next Search" button is used the program will position the
editing cursor on the next
mutation tag. Double clicking will automatically bring up the appropriate 
traces as shown in figures 1, 2 and 5
(_fpref(Mutation-Detection-Introduction, Introduction to mutation detection,t)).
The user can view the traces and if necessary alter the tag (eg delete it
if it is a false positive).

Once all the data has been checked and all mutations and heterozygous bases
have been tagged a report can be generated using the "Report Mutations"
option in the editor "Commands" menu. Note that it is also possible to
simply report all differences between base calls and the reference, but the
usual procedure is for the program to report all bases tagged as "Mutation"
or "Heterozygous". Example output is shown above in Figure 6
(_fpref(Mutation-Detection-Introduction, Introduction to mutation detection,t)).
The report appears in the gap4 "Output window" which can
be saved to disk by right clicking on the text and selecting "Output to
disk".


_split()
@node Processing-Batches-Of-Mutation-Data-Trace-Files
@subsection Processing Batches Of Mutation Data Trace Files

It is not clear which is the best way of organising the data for the simplest
and most efficient processing using the current programs, but 
for now we make the following suggestions.

We assume that the region of the DNA being studied has a standard set of 
forward and reverse primer pairs covering all segments of interest and that
a standard reference sequence in EMBL format is available.

We recommend that batches of data from single primer pair combinations
are processed separately, using separate temporary gap4 databases. 
For example, exon 11 of BRCA1 can be covered by five
pairs of forward and reverse primers and we suggest that
batches of traces obtained from each of these primer pairs should be 
processed using five gap4 databases.

Each processing run should create a new database and should enter, not 
only the
new sets of patient data for that particular
primer pair, but also the corresponding
reference sequence and reference traces.

Obviously when several primer pairs are needed to cover a given region of
the DNA (eg for BRCA1) the same reference sequence would be used for
all the primer pairs.

An alternative to the above is to create a template database 
for each primer pair which contains the data for the corresponding 
forward and reverse 
reference traces plus the fully annotated reference sequence.
These template databases are copied to create a
temporary database for each new batch of data for the given primer pair.

Whichever of these two strategies is adopted
each batch of new data is processed, analysed and 
assembled into these temporary databases, inspected
visually, and a mutation report generated.

The use of separate temporary databases
simplifies the assignment of reference traces and the use of the report
generation function.

_lpicture(mut_template_reads_single)

Figure 9. An overview of a database containing data for only one primer pair of BRCA1

For long term storage and to facilitate larger studies, the content of each
of these temporary databases is then transferred to archive databases, after
which the temporary databases are no longer needed. 
The archive databases could be restricted to individual primer pairs
or could accommodate data covering the whole of the reference sequence.

@node Processing-Batches-Of-Mutation-Data-Trace-Files-Using-Pregap4
@subsection Processing Batches Of Mutation Data Trace Files Using Pregap4

All the data processing other than visual inspection of traces and report 
generation is handled by the program pregap4
(_fpref(Pregap4-Introduction, Pregap4 introduction, pregap4)). 
Pregap4 achieves this by
running a set of individual programs selected by the user. 

_picture(mut_pregap4)

Figure 10. The pregap4 Configure Modules window showing a typical list of mutation data option selections.

The "Configure Modules" window shown in Figure 10. 
is used to select which programs
to apply to a batch of data, and to configure their usage. On the left is a list
of programs and options, with "x" showing the ones that have been selected.
If the user clicks on an option name its name is given a blue background and
its configurable parameters are shown in the right hand panel to enable the
user to alter them. Here "Reference Traces" has been selected which 
enables the user to set the reference traces and sequence. 

The other selected options (marked with "x") are typical of the ones used for
mutation detection studies. Below we describe the use of each plus a few 
alternatives. All of the options are descibed in more detail elsewhere in
our documentation, our intention here is to give an overview of their use
during mutation studies.

Note that the window labelled "Files to Process" is used to
tell the program which files to process as a batch.

@subsection Configuration Of Pregap4 For Mutation Data


@table @var

@item General Configuration

This option allows the user to select whether the trace names used for
the samples should be the same as their file names or should be the
names stored inside the files.

@item Phred

Phred is a base caller which also assigns confidence values to each base.
Generally the data passed to pregap4 has already been base called. However
not all base callers assign confidence values and so it can be useful to
apply phred or ATQA (which does not base call but does assign confidence values).
Alternatively "Estimate Base Accuracies" can be applied which is a simple
program for providing numerical values which reflect the signal to noise ratio
for each base, and which can be used instead of confidence values.
(Note that if quality clipping is used, its score thresholds depend on 
whether confidence values of eba values are used).

@item Trace Format Conversion

This option can be used to convert bulky files such as those of ABI to a
compact format such as SCF or ZTR without loss of the data required for
trace display.

@item Initialise Experiment Files

The input to gap4 and several of the other programs used here is a data
format known as Experiment file format. This step, which has no
configurable parameters is essential for mutation data processing.

@item Augment Experiment Files

The section on Reference Traces outlined the use of "Naming Schemes" for
associating pairs of forward and reverse readings, and for assigning
reference traces. The naming scheme must be loaded from pregap4's File
menu. "Augment Experiment Files" must be activated in order for the
naming scheme to be applied. No parameters need be set.

@item Quality Clip

The reliability of the base calls varies with position along the sequence.
Near to both ends the data is less reliable. The "Quality Clip" option
trims the ends of the sequences by analysing their confidence values or
accuracy estimates (if present) or the density of unknown bases in the 
sequence. By observing these "clip points" other processing programs
will work more reliably.

@item Reference Traces

As explained above it is necessary to specify a reference trace (preferably
one for each strand of the data if processing data from both strands). The
Reference sequence can also be set here.
Note that
even if our suggestion to preload the reference traces into the gap4
database is followed, it is still necessary to specify them here for use
by the
mutation detection modules.

@item Trace Difference

This is the program which compares the patient and reference traces to
search for possible mutations. It adds data to the experiment files
to mark each predicted mutation, and this data will appear as tags in the gap4
database. It can also create a new trace file containing the difference
of the reference and the sample. The numerical parameters control the
sensitivity of the algorithms, and hence the ratio between the numbers
of false positive and negative results.

@item Heterozygote Scanner

This is the program which compares the patient and reference traces to
search for possible heterozygous bases. It adds data to the experiment files
to mark each predicted heterozygous base, 
and this data will appear as tags in the gap4
database. The numerical parameters control the
sensitivity of the algorithms, and hence the ratio between the numbers
of false positive and negative results.

@item Gap4 shotgun assembly

In order to be able report the positions of mutations relative to the reference
sequence, and to be able to compare sets of samples from patients, it is
necessary to perform multiple sequence alignment on the data. This is termed
"assembly" and is usually performed by gap4, although other programs can be
operated via pregap4. If following the suggestion to preload the reference
sequence to a temporary database for each batch, supply the name of this
database here. Otherwise a new database should be named and created
from this option. (If this strategy is adopted make sure that the reference 
sequence and the references traces are assembled!) The parameters
that control the assembly process and are described elsewhere.
@end table

Note that pregap4 has the facility to save its configuration and parameter
settings. 
This means that the current configuration will be set automatically next
time the program is used (and hence the steps just described only need to be
performed once). In addition pregap4 can be run non-interactively
by typing a single line on the command line.
Taking thse two capabilities together, means that only one line need be 
typed in order to process all subsequent batches of data (assuming the
file names are reused, which is easy to arrange.)


_split()
@node Discussion-Of-Mutation-Data-Processing
@subsection Discussion Of Mutation Data Processing Methods

At present pregap4 and gap4 clearly show their primary usage in the field
of genome assembly, but versions tailored to mutation studies can be created once
the requirements are agreed. 
Ideally all processing should be controlled by a single program which once
configured for any project should require users to provide only the project
name - all other file names and parameters could be preset, and all processing,
including archiving and backup, performed automatically, leaving the data 
ready for visual inspection. 

The automatic mutation and heterozygote detection
programs work well on all the test data we have but now they
require evaluation by external groups. Such analysis would
enable us to improve the algorithms and to tune their parameters.
At present we know that sometimes a base will be declared both as a mutation
and as a heterozygous position when visual inspection shows that it is
one or the other.

There is still much that can be done overall to improve the methods, 
but the text above
summarises their status in July 2002.
Although currently valuable for real scientific
and clinical work they should perhaps be viewed as prototypes.

