@cindex polyA_clip: man page
@cindex polyA clipping
@cindex polyT clipping

@unnumberedsec NAME

polyA_clip --- Mark polyA and polyT heads and tails.

@unnumberedsec SYNOPSIS

@code{polyA_clip} [@code{-vt}] [@code{-t}] [@code{-x} @i{min_length(0)}] 
[@code{p} @i{percent_cutoff(95)}] [@code{w} @i{window_length(50)}] files...


@unnumberedsec OPTIONS

@table @asis
@item @code{-v}
     Enable verbose output. This outputs information on which files are
     currently being clipped.

@item @code{-t}
     Test mode. The SL and SR information is written to stdout instead of
     being appended to the Experiment file.

@item @code{-x} @i{min_length}
     Sequences which after clipping are shorter than min_length are reported.
     
@item @code{-w} @i{window_length}
     The length of the window that is slid along the sequence to analyse the
     composition.

@item @code{-p} @i{percentage}
     Windows containing this percentage of A or T bases are considered as 
     polyA or polyT
@end table

@unnumberedsec DESCRIPTION

PolyA_clip searches the 5' and 3' ends of sequence readings for the presence
of polyA and polyT heads and tails. It marks them using the SL and SR 
experiment file records, and hence should be applied after quality clipping
and sequence vector clipping. Any number of files can be processed in a single
run. The algorithm is as follows. The user supplies window_length and  
percentage. From MIN(QR,SR) slide the window left until 
percent_A < percentage and percent_T < percentage.
Then from the right edge of the window look left until
a C or G is found. Mark this base SR. Do the equivalent for the 5' end and
mark SL.

@unnumberedsec SEE ALSO

_fxref(Formats-Exp, ExperimentFile(4), formats)
