@cindex Quality plot

This option can be invoked from the main gap4 View menu, in which case
it appears as a single plot, or from the View menu of the Template
Display, in which case it will appear as part of the Template Display.

For each base in the consensus a "quality" code
is computed based on the accuracy of 
the data on each strand and whether or not the two strands agree. In a
future release it will be renamed the "Strand Comparison Plot"
This "quality" is then plotted using colour and 
height to distinguish the quality codes shown below.

@example
@group
Colour  Height          Meaning

grey    0 to 0          OK on both strands, both agree
blue    0 to 1          OK on plus strand only
green  -1 to 0          OK on minus strand only
red    -1 to 1          Bad on both strands
black  -2 to 2          OK on both strands but they disagree
@end group
@end example

_lpicture(template.quality)

For example, in the figure we see that the first four hundred or so
bases are mostly only well determined on the forward strand.

@node Quality-Examining
@subsection Examining the Quality Plot
@cindex Quality plot: examining the plot

Note that when displaying many bases the screen resolution implies that the
quality codes for many bases will appear in the same screen pixel.  However
the use of varying heights ensures that all problematic regions will be
visible, even when the problem is only with a single base position. Hence when
the quality plot consists of a single grey line all known quality problems
have been resolved, at the current consensus and quality cutoffs. 

The quality plot appears as "Calculate quality" in the Results Manager window
(_fpref(Results, Results Manager, results)).

Within the Results Manager commands available, using the right mouse
button, include "Information",
which lists a summary of
the distribution of quality types to the output window, and "List" which lists
the actual quality values for each base to the output window. These quality
values are written in a textual form of single letters per base and are listed
below.

@table @var
@item
@r{+Strand -Strand}
@item a
@r{Good    Good} (in agreement)
@item b
@r{Good    Bad}
@item c
@r{Bad     Good}
@item d
@r{Good    None}
@item e
@r{None    Good}
@item f
@r{Bad     Bad}
@item g
@r{Bad     None}
@item h
@r{None    Bad}
@item i
@r{Good    Good} (disagree)
@item j
@r{None    None}
@end table

An example of the output using "Information" and "List" follows.

@example
============================================================
Wed 02 Apr 12:14:06 1997: quality summary
------------------------------------------------------------
Contig xb56b6.s1 (#11)
 81.00 OK on both strands and they agree(a)
  3.94 OK on plus strand only(b,d)
 11.98 OK on minus strand only(c,e)
  1.85 Bad on both strands(f,g,h,j)
  1.22 OK on both strands but they disagree(i)
============================================================
Wed 02 Apr 12:14:09 1997: quality listing
------------------------------------------------------------
Contig xb56b6.s1 (#11)

          10         20         30         40         50         60
  eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeehee eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee

          70         80         90        100        110        120
  eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee

         130        140        150        160        170        180
  eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee

         190        200        210        220        230        240
  eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee heeeeeeeee eeeeeeeici iiaiaciiia aaaaaaaaac

         250        260        270        280        290        300
  aaaacaaaaa aaaaaaaiia aaaaaaaaaa aaaaaaaaaa aaaabaaaaa aaaaaaaaaa

         310        320        330        340        350        360
  aaaaaaaaaa aaaaaaaaaa aaaaaaaaaa aaaaaaaaaa aaaaaaaaaa faaaaaaaaa

[ output removed for brevity ]
@end example
