@menu
* ReadPair-Display::            Graphical Output
* ReadPair-Output::             Textual Output
@end menu

@cindex Find read pairs
@cindex Read pairs

This function is used to check the positions and orientations of
readings taken from the same templates. 
It is invoked from the gap4 View menu.

For each template the relative
position of its readings and the contigs they are in are examined. This
analysis can give information about the relative order, separation and
orientations of contigs and also show possible problems in the data.
The search can be over the whole database or a subset of contigs named
in a list (_fpref(Lists, Lists, lists)) 
or file of file names. The results are written to the Output
Window and plotted in the Contig Comparator 
(_fxref(Contig Comparator, Contig Comparator, comparator)).
Read pair information is also used to colour code the results displayed in the
Template Display 
(_fpref(Template-Display, Template Display, template)).

Note that during assembly the template names and lengths are copied from
the experiment files into the gap database. _fxref(Formats-Exp,
Experiment Files, exp) The accuracy of the lengths will depend upon some
size selection being performed during the cloning procedures.

_picture(read_pairs)

Users choose to process "all contigs" or a subset selected from a file
of file names ("file") or a list ("list"). If either of the subset
options is selected the "browse" button will be activated and can be
clicked on to call up a file or list browser dialogue.

_split()
@node ReadPair-Display
@subsection Find Read Pairs Graphical Output
@cindex Find read pairs: display

The contig comparator is used to plot all templates with readings that span
contigs. That is, the lines drawn on the contig comparator are a visual
representation of the relationship (orientation and overlap) between contigs.
When a template spans more than two contigs, all the combinations of pairs of
contigs are plotted. However such cases are uncommon.

_lpicture(comparator)

The figure above shows a typical Contig Comparator plot which includes
several types of result in addition to those from Read Pair analysis.

The lines for the read-pairs 
are, by default, shown in blue. The length of the line is the average
length of the two readings within the pair. The slope of the line represents
the relative orientation of the two readings. If they are both the same
orientation (including both complemented) the line is drawn from top left to
bottom right, otherwise the line is drawn from top right to bottom left.

Clicking with the right mouse button on a read pair line brings up a menu
containing, amongst other things, "Invoke template display"
(_fpref(Template-Display, Template Display, template)).
This creates a template display of the two contigs. The spanning template 
will be coloured bright yellow if the readings on the template are 
consistent with one another, or dark yellow if they are not. The ordering of
the contigs may need to be altered, or one contig may need complementing,
before the readings on the template become consistent. Using the 
"Invoke join editor" command 
(_fpref(Editor-Joining, The Join Editor, contig_editor))
from the same menu will bring up the Join Editor 
with the two contigs shown end to end. 

_split()
@node ReadPair-Output
@subsection Find Read Pairs Text Output
@cindex Find read pairs: output
@cindex Find read pairs: example

Two types of results are written to the Output Window: those containing
apparently consistent data about the relative orientations and positions
of contigs, and those that show inconsistencies in the data. The
inconsistencies will be due to misassembly or to misnaming of readings and
templates.

In the Output Window the program writes a line of information for each
template and a line of information for each reading from that template.
In order to restrict this information to fit on a standard 80 column
display a few abbreviations are used.  An example for two consistent and
one 
problematic template is shown below. Templates with possible problems are
separated from those without. The templates shown are sorted by problem;
consistent templates at the top followed by increasingly inconsistent
templates at the bottom.

@example
@group
Template       zf18c8( 117), length 1400-2000(expected 1700)
     Reading        zf18a2.s1(   +1F), pos   5620  +91, contig   46
     Reading        zf18c8.s1( -117F), pos   1084 +288, contig  127

Template       zf98f4( 659), length 1400-2000(computed 7263)
     Reading        zf98f4.s1( -659F), pos     27 +238, contig  548
     Reading        zf98f4.r1( +800R), pos   5392 +211, contig   46

*** Possibly problematic templates listed below ***
Template       zf24g6( 262), length 1400-2000(observed 1365)
 D   Reading        zf24g6.r1( +808R), pos    463 +206, contig   46
 D   Reading        zf24g6.s1( -262F), pos   1559 +268, contig   46
@end group
@end example

@subsubsection The Template Lines
@cindex Find read pairs: template lines
@cindex Template: find read pairs

To describe the format of the template line we provide a detailed explanation
of the lines above for the last Template block.

@table @code
@item "Template       zf24g6( 262)"
This is template with name "zf24g6" and number 262.

@item length 1400-2000
These are the minimum and maximum lengths specified for this template.

@item observed(1365)
This section has the general format of "comment(distance)", where "comment" is
one of the following.

@table @var
@item observed
The template has both forward and reverse readings within this contig. From
this information the actual size of the template can be seen. In the example
this is "1365".

@item expected
The template length is estimated as the average of the specified minimum and
maximum size. This will be seen when the template does not span contigs and
does not have both forward and reverse primers visible.

@item computed
The template has forward and reverse readings in different contigs. The length
is computed by butting the two contigs together, end to end, and finding the
resultant separation of the template ends. It is not possible to tell whether
the two contigs overlap, and if so by how much. Hence the "computed" lengths
should not be considered as absolute.
@end table
@end table

@subsubsection The Reading Lines
@cindex Find read pairs: reading lines

@table @code
@item "?DPS"
The first four characters may be either space or one of "?", "D", "P" or "S".
The meaning of each of these is as follows.

@table @var
@item ?
No primer information is available for these readings.
@item D
The distance between forward and reverse primers (ie the template length) is
not as expected.
@item P
The primer information for readings on this template is inconsistent. An
example of this is where two forward readings exist, both using the universal
primer, and the readings are not in close proximity to each other.
@item S
The template strand information is inconsistent. This problem can be seen when
the forward and reverse readings are from the same strand, or two forward
readings are pointing in opposite directions.
@end table

Absence of all of these characters means that the template is consistent.

@item "Reading        zf24g6.r1"
The reading name

@item "( +808R)"
The reading number. The "+" or "-" character preceding the number represents
whether the reading has been complemented ("+" for original, "-" for
complemented). The letter following the number indicates the primer
information found for this reading. It may be one of:

@table @var
@item ?
Unknown
@item F
Forward, universal primer
@item f
Forward, custom primer (eg a walk)
@item R
Reverse, universal primer
@item r
Reverse, custom primer
@end table

@item "pos    463 +206"
The position and the length of the reading within the contig. In this case the
reading starts at position 463 and extends for 206 bases. For a complemented
reading the position marks the 3' end of the reading. For both cases the
position can be considered as the 'left end' of the reading as displayed
within the contig.

@item "contig   46"
The reading number of the left most reading within this contig.
@end table

In the above example the template has two readings. It can be seen that the
template starts at contig position 463 and finishes at position 1827.  The
observed length is 1365, which is just below the expected minimum length of
1400. Hence the template is flagged as having an invalid distance. There are
no other inconsistencies for this template and so it is likely that the
only "problem" is that the experimental size selection process was not
as precise as was thought.
