@node References
@unnumberedsec Publications
@cindex references

@enumerate 1
@item Bonfield, James K. and Staden, Rodger.
ZTR: a new format for DNA sequence trace data. Bioinformatics 18, 3-10, (2002).

@item Bonfield, James, K., Beal, Kathryn F., Betts, Matthew J. and Staden, Rodger.
Trev: a DNA trace editor and viewer. 
Bioinformatics 18, 194-195, (2002)

@item Rodger Staden, David P. Judge and James K. Bonfield
Sequence assembly and finishing methods
Bioinformatics. A Practical Guide to the Analysis of Genes and Proteins. 
Second Edition
Eds. Andreas D. Baxevanis and B. F. Francis Ouellette. John Wiley & Sons, 
New York, NY, USA, (2001)

@item The C. elegans Sequencing Consortium.
Genome Sequence of the Nematode C. elegans: A Platform for
Investigating Biology.
Science 282, 2012-2018 (1998)

@item Rodger Staden, Kathryn F. Beal and James K. Bonfield
The Staden Package, 1998. 
Computer Methods in Molecular Biology
Eds Stephen Misener and Steve Krawetz. The Humana Press Inc., Totowa, NJ
07512

@item Bonfield, J.K., Rada, C. and Staden, R.
Automated detection of point mutations using flourescent sequence trace
subtraction.
Nucleic Acids Res. 26, 3404-3409 (1998)

@item Flint, J., Sims, M., Clark, K., Staden, R. and Thomas, K.
An Oligo-Screening Strategy to Fill Gaps Found During Shotgun
Sequencing Projects.
DNA Sequence 8, 241-245 (1998)

@item Staden, R. The Staden Sequence Analysis Package.
Molecular Biotechnology 5, 233-241 (1996)

@item Bonfield, J.K. and Staden, R. Experiment files and their application during 
large-scale sequencing projects.
DNA Sequence 6, 109-117 (1996)

@item Staden, R. Indexing and using sequence databases.
Methods in Enzymology 266, 105-114 (1996)

@item Bonfield, J.K., Smith, K.F. and Staden, R. A new DNA sequence assembly program.
Nucleic Acids Res. 24, 4992-4999 (1995)

@item Bonfield, J.K. and Staden, R. The application of numerical estimates of 
base calling accuracy to DNA sequencing projects.
Nucleic Acids Res. 23, 1406-1410 (1995)

@item Dear, S. and Staden, R. A standard file format for data from DNA sequencing
instruments.
DNA Sequence 3, 107-110 (1992)

@item Staden, R. and Dear, S. Indexing the sequence libraries: Software providing
a common indexing system for all the standard sequence libraries. 
DNA Sequence 3, 99-105 (1992).

@item Dear, S. and Staden, R. A sequence assembly and editing program for 
efficient management of large projects.
Nucleic Acid Res. 19, 3907-3911 (1991).

@item Staden, R. Screening protein and nucleic acid sequences against libraries of
patterns.
DNA Sequence 1, 369-374 (1991).

@item Staden, R. Searching for patterns in protein and nucleic acid sequences. 
Methods in Enzymology 183, 193-211. (1990).

@item Staden, R. Finding protein coding regions in genomic sequences.
Methods in Enzymology 183, 163-180. (1990).

@item Staden, R. Methods for discovering novel motifs in nucleic acid sequences.
CABIOS 5, 293-298 (1989)

@item Staden R, Methods for calculating the probabilities of finding
patterns in sequences.
CABIOS 5 89-96 (1989)

@item Staden R, Methods to define and locate patterns of motifs in
sequences.
CABIOS 4, 53-60 (1988)

@item Staden, R.  Graphic methods to determine the function of nucleic acid sequences.
Nucleic Acid Res. 12, 521-538 (1984)

@item Staden, R.  Computer methods to locate signals in nucleic acid sequences. 
Nucleic Acid Res. 12, 505-519 (1984)

@item Staden, R. A computer program to enter DNA gel reading data into a computer.
Nucleic Acid Res. 12, 499-503 (1984)

@item Staden, R. Measurements of the effects that coding for a protein
has on a DNA sequence and their use for finding genes.
Nucleic Acid Res. 12, 551-567 (1984)

@item Staden, R.  and  McLachlan,  A.D. Codon preference and its use in identifying protein
coding regions in long DNA sequences.
Nucleic Acid Res. 10 141-156 (1982)

@item Staden, R. Automation of the computer handling of gel reading data produced 
by the shotgun method of DNA sequencing. 
Nucleic Acid Res. 10, 4731-4751 (1982)

@item Staden, R. An interactive graphics program for comparing and aligning
nucleic acid and amino acid sequences. 
Nucleic Acid Res. 10, 2951-2961 (1982)

@item Staden, R. A new computer method for the storage and  manipulation
of DNA gel reading data. 
Nucleic Acid Res. 8, 3673-3694 (1980)

@item Staden, R. A computer program to search for tRNA genes.
Nucleic Acid Res. 8, 817-825 (1980)
@end enumerate
