@node Formats-Restriction
@section Restriction Enzyme File
@cindex Restriction enzyme files

Restriction enzymes and their recognition sequences used by the package
must be stored in the format described below. Updates of the files can be
obtained from the REBASE restriction enzyme database of Dr R
Roberts. Contact roberts@@neb.com or macelis@@neb.com to join the mailing
list and state that you want the files sent in "staden" format.

Standard four-cutter, six-cutter and all-enzymes files are supplied with
the package and
users can create and use their own "personal" files.  To create your own file
of enzymes you may need to extract the information from the currently
defined files. These are stored in the tables directory (folder)
distributed with the package, and are named:

@example
RENZYM.4
RENZYM.6
RENZYM.ALL
@end example


We call the
recognition sequences "strings". The format is as follows: each
string or set of strings must be preceded by a name, each string
must be preceded and terminated with a slash (/), and each set of
strings by 2 slashes. For example AATII/GACGT'C// defines the name
AATII, its recognition sequence GACGTC and its cut site with the '
symbol; ACCI/GT'MKAC// defines the name ACCI and its recognition
sequence includes IUB symbols for incompletely defined symbols in
nucleic acid sequences; BBVI/GCAGCNNNNNNNN'/'NNNNNNNNNNNNGCTGC//
defines the name BBVI and this time two recognition sequences and
cut sites are specified to enable the definition of the cut position
relative to the recognition sequence. If no cut site is
included the first base of the recognition sequence is displayed as
being on the 3' side of the recognition sequence.

A section of a typical file follows:

@example
 AATII/GACGT'C//
 ACCI/GT'MKAC//
 AFLII/C'TTAAG//
 AVAII/G'GWCC//
 AVRII/C'CTAGG//
 BANI/G'GYRCC//
 BANII/GRGCY'C//
 BBVI/GCAGCNNNNNNNN'/'NNNNNNNNNNNNGCTGC//
 BCLI/T'GATCA//
 BGLI/GCCNNNN'NGGC//
 BGLII/A'GATCT//
 BINI/GGATCNNNN'/'NNNNNGATCC//
 BSMI/GAATGCN'/NG'CATTC//
 BSP1286/GDGCH'C//
@end example
