@cindex Find repeats
@cindex Repeat search

The purpose of this function (which is invoked from the gap4 View menu) 
is to find exact repeats in contig
consensus sequences. An exact repeat is defined as a run of consecutive
identical ACGT characters; no mismatches or gaps are permitted.

If it has not already occurred, selection of
this function will automatically
transform the Contig Selector into the Contig Comparator.
_fxref(Contig Comparator, Contig Comparator, comparator)
Each match found is plotted as a diagonal line in the Contig Comparator.
The length of the diagonal line is proportional to the length of the
match.

If the match is for two contigs in the same orientation the diagonal
will be parallel to the main diagonal, if they are not the line will be
perpendicular to the main diagonal. The matches displayed in the Contig
Comparator can be used to invoke the Join Editor (_fpref(Editor-Joining,
The Join Editor, contig_editor)) or Contig Editors (_fpref(Editor,
Editing in gap4, contig_editor)), and an Information button will display
data about the match in the Output window. e.g.

@example
@group
Repeat match
    From contig xb54a3.s1(#26) at 78
    With contig xb62h3.s1(#3) at 1
    Length 37
@end group
@end example

This means that position 78 in the contig with xb54a3.s1 (reading number
26) at its left end matches 37 bases at position 1 in the contig with
xb62h3.s1 (number 3) at its left end.

_picture(repeats)

Users can elect to search a "single" contig, or compare "all contigs",
or a subset of contigs defined in a list or a file. If "file" or "list"
is selected the browse button is activated and gives access to file or
list browsers.  If they choose to analyse a single contig the dialogue
concerned with selecting the contig and the region to search becomes
activated. The "Minimum Repeat" defines the smallest match that the
algorithm will report.  The algorithm will search only for repeats in
the forward direction "Find direct repeats", or only those in the
reverse direction "Find inverted repeats", or both "Find both".

If "Mask active tags" is selected the "Select tags" button is activated.
Clicking on this button will bring up a check box dialogue to enable the
user to select the tags types they wish to activate. Masking the active
tags means that all segments covered by tags that are "active" will not
be used in the matching algorithm.
A typical use of this mode is to avoid finding
matches in segments covered by tags of type ALUS (ie segments thought to
be Alu sequence) or that already covered by REPT tags. 
_fxref(Anno-Types, Tag types, tags)

After the search is complete clicking on "Yes" in the "Save tags to
file" panel will activate the "File name" box and all repeats on the
list will be written to a file. This file can be used with "Enter tags"
(_fpref(Enter Tags, Enter Tags, complement)) to create REPT tags for all
the repeats found.  Note that "Enter tags" will remove all the results 
plotted in the contig comparator.

Note that the current version of Find Repeats has a limit to the number
of repeats it can store. The limit depends on the current maximum
consensus length, so if you want to increase the limit, reset the
maximum consensus length. This can be done using the "Set maxseq" item
in the "Options" menu.




