@menu
* Restrict-Selecting::          Selecting enzymes
* Restrict-Examining::          Examining the plot
* Restrict-Reconfig::           Reconfiguring the plot
* Restrict-Tags::               Creating tags for cut sites
* Restrict-Output::             Textual outputs
@end menu

@cindex Restriction enzymes

The restriction enzyme map function finds and displays restriction sites
within a specified region of a contig. 
It is invoked from the gap4 View menu.
Users can select the enzyme
types to search for and can save the sites found as tags within the
database.

_lpicture(restrict_enzymes)

This figure shows a typical view of the Restriction Enzyme Map
in which the results for each enzyme type have been configured by the
user to be drawn in different colours.  On the left of the display the
enzyme names are shown adjacent to the lines of plotted results. If no
result is found for any particular enzyme eg here APAI, the line will
still be drawn so that zero cutters can be identified. Three of the
enzymes types have been selected and are shown highlighted. The results
can be scrolled vertically (and horizontally if the plot is zoomed in).
A ruler is shown along the base and the current cursor position (the vertical
black line) is shown in the left hand box near the top right of
the display.  If the user clicks, in turn, on two restriction sites
their separation in base pairs will appear in the top right hand box.
Information about the last site touched is shown in the Information line
at the bottom of the display. At the top the edit menu is shown
torn off and can be used to create tags for highlighted enzyme types.

_split()
@node Restrict-Selecting
@subsection Selecting Enzymes
@cindex Restriction enzymes: selecting enzymes

Files of restriction enzyme names and their cut sites are stored in disk
files. For the format of these files and notes about creating new ones see 
_fref(Formats-Restriction, Restriction enzyme files, renzymes)

When the file is read, the list of enzymes is displayed in a scrolling
window.  To select enzymes press and drag the left mouse button within
the list.  Dragging the mouse off the bottom of the list will scroll it to
allow selection of a range larger than the displayed section of the
list.  When the left button is pressed any existing selection is
cleared. To select several disjoint entries in the list press control
and the left mouse button. Once the enzymes have been chosen, pressing
OK will create the plot.

_split()
@node Restrict-Examining
@subsection Examining the Plot
@cindex Restriction enzymes: examining the plot

Positioning the cursor over a match will cause its name and cut position
to appear in the information line.  If the right mouse button is pressed
over a match, a popup menu containing Information and Configure will
appear. The Information function in this menu will display the data for
this cut site and enzyme in the Output Window.

It is possible to find the distance between any two cut sites.  Pressing
the left mouse button on a match will display "Select another cut" at
the bottom of the window.  Then, pressing the left button on another
match will display the distance, in bases, between the two sites. This
is shown in a box located at the top right corner of the window.

_split()
@node Restrict-Reconfig
@subsection Reconfiguring the Plot
@cindex Configure: restriction enzymes
@cindex Restriction enzymes: configuring

The plot displays the results for each restriction enzyme on a separate
line.  Enzymes with no sites are also shown.  The order of these lines
may be changed by pressing and dragging the middle mouse button or alt + left
mouse button on one of the displayed names at the left side of the screen.

The results are plotted as black lines but users can select colours for
each enzyme type by pressing the right button on any of its matches.  A
menu containing Information and Configure will pop up. Configure will
display a colour selection dialogue.  Adjusting the colour here will
adjust the colour for all matches for this restriction enzyme.

_split()
@node Restrict-Tags
@subsection Creating Tags for Cut Sites
@cindex Tags: restriction enzymes plot
@cindex Restriction enzymes: tags, creation of
@cindex Cut sites: restriction enzymes
@cindex Restriction enzymes: cut sites

Clicking the left mouse button on an enzyme name at the left of the
display toggles a highlight.  The Create tags command from the Edit menu
will add tags to the database for all the matches whose enzyme names are
highlighted.
The command displays a dialogue box
listing the enzyme names on the left, and the tag type to create for
that enzyme on the right. Tag types must be chosen for all the listed
restriction enzyme types before the tags can be created. Suitable tag
types to choose are the ENZ0, ENZ1 (etc) tags.

_split()
@node Restrict-Output
@subsection Textual Outputs
@cindex Restriction enzymes: textual output
@cindex Output enzyme by enzyme: restriction enzymes plot
@cindex Output ordered on position: restriction enzymes plot

The Results menu of the plot contains options to list the restriction
enzyme sites found. One option sorts the results by enzyme name and the
other by the positions of the matches.

The output below shows the textual output from "Output enzyme by enzyme".
The Fragment column gives the size of the fragments between each of the cut
sites. The Lengths column contains the fragment sizes sorted on size.

@example
Contig zf98g12.r1 (#801) 
Number of enzymes = 3
Number of matches = 7
  Matches found=     1 
      Name            Sequence                  Position Fragment lengths
    1 AATII           GACGT'C                       7130   7129    556 
                                                            556   7129 
  Matches found=     5 
      Name            Sequence                  Position Fragment lengths
    1 ACCI            GT'CGAC                        414    413    189 
    2 ACCI            GT'CTAC                       1296    882    413 
    3 ACCI            GT'CTAC                       3871   2575    882 
    4 ACCI            GT'CTAC                       5816   1945   1681 
    5 ACCI            GT'CGAC                       7497   1681   1945 
                                                            189   2575 
  Matches found=     1 
      Name            Sequence                  Position Fragment lengths
    1 AHAII           GA'CGTC                       7127   7126    559 
                                                            559   7126 
@end example

The output below shows the textual output from "Output ordered on position".

@example
Contig zf98g12.r1 (#801) 
Number of enzymes = 3
Number of matches = 7
      Name            Sequence                  Position Fragment lengths
    1 ACCI            GT'CGAC                        414    413      3 
    2 ACCI            GT'CTAC                       1296    882    189 
    3 ACCI            GT'CTAC                       3871   2575    367 
    4 ACCI            GT'CTAC                       5816   1945    413 
    5 AHAII           GA'CGTC                       7127   1311    882 
    6 AATII           GACGT'C                       7130      3   1311 
    7 ACCI            GT'CGAC                       7497    367   1945 
                                                            189   2575 
@end example
