@cindex Results manager
@cindex Results manager: introduction
@cindex Results: removing
@cindex Removing results

Some commands within __prog__ produce "results" that are updated
automatically as data is edited. The Result Manager provides a way to
list these results, and to interact with them.

A result is an abstract term used to define any collection of
data. Typically this data can be displayed, manipulated and is usually
updated automatically when changes are made that affect it. Each set
of matches from a particular search 
plotted on the Contig Comparator 
(_fpref(Contig Comparator, Contig
Comparator, comparator))
is a result, as are
entire displays such as the Template Display.

_picture(results.1)

The "results" window, shown above, can be invoked either from the View
menu in the main display or from the View menu of the Contig Comparator.
Each result is listed in the window on a separate line containing the
time that the result was created (which may not be the same as when it
was last updated), the name of the function that created the result, and
the result number. The number is simply a unique identifier to help
distinguish two results produced by the same function.

Each item in the list is consuming memory on your computer. Running
functions over and over again without removing the previous results
will slow down your machine and it will, eventually, run out of
memory. Removing items from the list solves this.

Pressing the right mouse button over an listed item will display a popup
menu of operations that can be performed on this result. The operations
available will always contain "Remove" which will delete this result and
shut down any associated window, but others listed will depend on the
result selected. In the illustration above the popup menu for the
"Repeat search" can be seen. Here the operations relate to a set of
repeat matches currently being displayed in the Contig Comparator (not
shown).

The Contig Comparator functions ("Find internal joins", "Find read
pairs", "Find repeats", "Check assembly" and "Find Sequences") are all
listed in the Results Manager once per usage of the function. It is
worth remembering that the only places to completely remove the plots
from one of these functions is using the "Remove" command within the
Results Manager or to use the "Clear" button within the Contig
Comparator to remove all plots.
