@cindex screen_seq: man page
@unnumberedsec NAME

screen_seq --- filters out sequence readings containing contaminating DNA

@unnumberedsec SYNOPSIS

@code{screen_seq} @code{-}[@code{lcwmiIsSpft}]
[@code{-l} @i{Length of minimum match (25)}]
[@code{-m} @i{Maximum vector length (100000)}]
[@code{-i} @i{Input file of reading file names}]
[@code{-I} @i{Input file of single reading to screen}]
[@code{-s} @i{Input file of sequence file names}]
[@code{-S} @i{Input file of single sequence to screen against}]
[@code{-p} @i{Passed output file of file names}]
[@code{-f} @i{Failed output file of file names}]
[@code{-t} @i{Test only mode}]


@unnumberedsec DESCRIPTION

@code{screen_seq} searches sequence readings to
filter out those from extraneous DNA
such as vector or bacterial sequences. We have separated this task
from that of locating and marking the extents of sequencing vector and
other cloning vectors. There we require precise identification of the
junction between the vectors and the target DNA. The filtering process
described here is designed to spot strong matches between readings and a
panel of possible contaminating sequences, and it splits readings into
passes and fails. Readings that fail have a PS line containing the word
"contaminant" and a tag of type "CONT" added to their experiment file.

Normal usage would be to compare a batch of readings in experiment file
format against a batch of possible contaminant sequences stored in (at
present) simple text files. Each batch is presented to the program as a
file of file names, and the program will write out two new files of file
names: one containing the names of the files that do not match any of
the contaminant sequences (the passes), and the other those that do
match (the
fails). It is also possible to compare single readings and single
contaminant files by giving their file names (i.e. it is not necessary
to use a file of file names for single files).

Given the frequent need to compare against the full E. coli genome the
algorithm is designed to be fast. The user controls the speed and
sensitivity by supplying a single parameter, "min_match".
The program will find the longest exact match of at
least min_match characters.

The search is
conducted only over the clipped portion of the readings. On our Alpha machine
it takes about 1 second to compare both strands of a reading against the
4.7 million bases of E. coli.

@unnumberedsec OPTIONS

@table @asis
@item @code{-l} @i{Length of minimum match (25)}
        The length of match required to initiate a closer search.

@item @code{-m} @i{Maximum vector length (100000)}
        The maximum length of the longest sequence to screen the readings against.

@item @code{-i} @i{Input file of reading file names}

@item @code{-I} @i{Input file of single reading to screen}

@item @code{-s} @i{Input file of sequence file names to screen against}

@item @code{-S} @i{Input file of single sequence to screen against}

@item @code{-p} @i{Passed output file of file names}

@item @code{-f} @i{Failed output file of file names}

@item @code{-t} @i{Test only mode}
        In test mode no experiment files are changed and the results are written
        to stdout. When not in test mode a dot "." is written to stdout for each
        comparison, and an exclamation mark "!" for each error detected.
@end table

@unnumberedsec EXAMPLES

@example
Usage: screen_seq [options and paramters] 
Where options and parameters are:
    [-l minimum match (25)]           [-m Max vector length (100000)]
    [-i readings to screen fofn]      [-I reading to screen]
    [-s seqs to screen against fofn]  [-S seq to screen against]
    [-t test only]
    [-p passed fofn]                  [-f failed fofn]
@end example


1. Screen the readings whose names are stored in fofn against a batch of
possible contaminant sequences whose names are stored in vnames. Write
the names of the readings that pass to file p and those that fail to
file f. Increase the maximum sequence length to 5000,000 characters and
require a minimum match of 20.


@example
@code{screen_seq -i fofn -s vnames -p p -f f -l20 -m5000000}
@end example

2. Screen the single reading stored in xpg33.g1 against a batch of
possible contaminant sequences whose names are stored in vnames. If the
reading does not match write its name to file p, otherwise to
file f. Increase the maximum sequence length to 5000,000 characters and
require a minimum match of 20.

@example
@code{screen_seq -I xpg33.g1 -s vnames -p p -f f -l20 -m5000000}
@end example

3. Screen the readings whose names are stored in fofn against a single
possible contaminant sequence stored in ecoli.seq. Write
the names of the readings that pass to file pass and those that fail to
file fails. Increase the maximum sequence length to 5000,000 characters and
require minimum  match of 20.

@example
@code{screen_seq -i fofn -S ecoli.seq -p pass -f fails -l20 -m5000000}
@end example



@unnumberedsec NOTES

Limits

Screen_seq is currently set to be able to process a maximum of 10,000
readings and 5000 screening sequences in a single run. The maximum
length of any screening sequence is 100,000 although this can be
overridden by use of the -m parameter (set it to 5000000 for E. coli).
At present the sequences to screen against must be stored in simple text
files containing individual sequences, with no entry names, and <100
characters per line.


The following errors can be reported.

@cindex Screen_seq: error codes
@enumerate 1
@item   "Failed to open file of file names to screen against". Fatal failure to
open the file of file names to screen against.
@item   "Failed to open single file to screen against". Fatal failure to
open the file to screen against.
@item   "Failed to open file of file names to screen". Fatal failure to
open the file of file names to screen.
@item   "Failed to open single file to screen". Fatal failure to
open the file to screen.
@item   "Failed to open file of passed file names". Fatal failure to
open the file of file names for readings that do not match.
@item   "Failed to open file of failed file names". Fatal failure to
open the file of file names for readings that match.
@item   "Failed to open single file to screen". Fatal failure to
open the file to screen.
@item   "Error: could not open vector file". An individual sequence file
could not be opened.
@item   "Error: could not read vector file". An individual sequence file
could not be read.
@item   "Error: could not hash vector file". An individual sequence file
could not be prepared for comparison.
@item	"Error: could not open experiment file". The file does not exist
or is unreadable.
@item	"Error: no sequence in experiment file".
@item	"Error: sequence too short". The reading is shorter than the
minimum match length.
@item	"Error: could not write to experiment file". The disk is full or
the file is write protected.
@item   "Error: hashing problem". An error occurred in the comparison
algorithm. Please report to staden-package@@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk
@end enumerate

Inconsistencies in the selection of options, such as selecting -I and
-i, should also cause the usage message (shown below) to appear, and 
the program to terminate. 

@i{PS} record added to the experiment file for any reading that matches.

@unnumberedsec SEE ALSO

_fxref(Formats-Exp,Experiment File, formats)
_fxref(Vector_Clip, Screening Against Vector Sequences, vector_clip)
