@cindex Show relationships

This function 
(which is available from the gap4 View menu)
is used to show the relationships of the gel readings in
the database in three ways.

@enumerate
@item
All contig descriptor lines followed by all gel descriptor lines.

@item
All contigs one after the other sorted, i.e. for each contig show its
contig descriptor line followed by all its gel descriptor lines sorted
on position from left to right

@item
Selected contigs: show the contig line and, in left to right order, the gel 
readings. This can be done for a list or a file of contigs. For a single
contig the output can be restricted to a user-defined region.
@end enumerate

_picture(show_rel)

In the above illustration, a single contig, all contigs, a file or list of
contigs can be selected. For a single contig, the contig identifier and
range selector becomes enabled. Choosing a file or list enables the "browse"
button which will invoke either the file or list browser respectively. When 
"all" contigs is selected a further choice is available: whether to 
@samp{Show readings in positional order}. This question determines
whether to output in method 1 (No) or 2 (Yes) listed above.

The function is particularly useful for creating files or lists of
reading names. To create a list of reading names run Show Relationships
to produce the desired output to the Output Window. Then either use cut
and paste from this window to a list editor, or use the right mouse
button in the output window to request the "Output to list" option. In
this latter case the header "@code{CONTIG LINES}" and "@code{GEL LINES}"
lines should be removed (although most functions will happily ignore,
with warnings, a list containing unknown reading names).

In the output window the reading names are underlined, indicating that they
are hyperlinks. Double clicking on a name with the left mouse button will
bring up the contig editor showing the start of that sequence, or it will move
an existing contig editor to display that position. (You may wish to turn off
the "Scroll on output" button if you do not wish the text output window to
scroll to the bottom as it displays the "Edit contig" title.) Clicking on a
reading name with the right mouse button will bring up a popup menu containing
Edit contig, Template display, List reading notes and List contig notes.

Below is an example showing a contig from position 1 to 689.  The left
gel reading is number 6 and has archive name HINW.010, the rightmost gel
reading is number 2 and is has archive name HINW.004.  On each gel
descriptor line is shown: the name of the archive version, the gel
number, the position of the left end of the gel reading relative to the
left end of the contig, the length of the gel reading (if this is
negative it means that the gel reading is in the opposite orientation to
its archive), the number of the gel reading to the left and the number
of the gel reading to the right.

@example
CONTIG LINES
CONTIG      LINE  LENGTH               ENDS
                                    LEFT   RIGHT
              48     689               6       2
GEL LINES
NAME      NUMBER POSITION LENGTH     NEIGHBOURS
                                    LEFT   RIGHT
HINW.010       6        1   -279       0       3
HINW.007       3       91   -265       6       5
HINW.009       5      137   -299       3      17
HINW.999      17      140    273       5      12
HINW.017      12      193    265      17      18
HINW.031      18      385   -245      12       2
HINW.004       2      401   -289      18       0
@end example

