@cindex Spin

_split()
@node SPIN-Introduction
@chapter Introduction

Spin is an interactive and graphical 
program for analysing and comparing sequences. It contains functions to
search for restriction sites, consensus sequences/motifs and protein 
coding regions, can analyse the composition of the sequence and
translate DNA to protein. 
It also contains functions for locating segments of similarity within and
between sequences, and for finding global and local alignments between pairs of
sequences. 
To help assess the statistical significance of comparisons the program can
calculate tables of expected and observed score frequencies for each
score level.
Most analytical functions which operate on single sequences
add their graphical results to a "SPIN Sequence Plot" that is associated 
with the sequence being analysed. (An exception is the restriction enzyme 
search which produces its own separate window.) Most functions which compare
pairs of sequences add their results to a "SPIN Sequence Comparison Plot".
The SPIN Sequence Plot and the SPIN Sequence Comparison Plot each have
associated sequence display windows: the Sequence Display and the 
Sequence Comparison Display. These allow the text of the sequences to be
viewed and use cursors to show the corresponding positions in the graphical
displays.
The graphical plots can be zoomed, and cursors or crosshairs can be
used to locate the positions of the individual results. Plots can be 
superimposed.

@node SPIN-Intro-Functions
@section Summary of the Spin Single Sequence Functions

Spin's main single sequence analytical functions are accessed via the 
Statistics,
Translation and Search menus.
The "Statistics" menu contains options to count and plot the base composition 
(_fpref(SPIN-Plot-Base-Composition, Plot Base Composition))
and also to count the dinucleotide frequencies
(_fpref(SPIN-Dinucleotide-Freq, Dinucleotide Frequencies)).

The "Translation" menu contains options to set the genetic code
(_fpref(SPIN-Set-Genetic-Code, Set Genetic Code)), translate to protein
(_fpref(SPIN-Translation-General, Translation)),
find open reading frames and write the results in either feature
table format or as fasta format protein sequence files
(_fpref(SPIN-Open-Reading-Frames, Find Open Reading Frames)), and to calculate 
codon tables.

The "Search" menu contains a variety of different searching techniques.
"Protein genes" has four methods for finding protein genes
(_fpref(SPIN-Codon-Usage-Method, Codon Usage Method))
(_fpref(SPIN-Author-Test, Author Test)),
(_fpref(SPIN-Positional-Base-Prefs, Positional base Preferences))
(accessed as a subcomponent of the Codon Usage Method), and
(_fpref(SPIN-Uneven-Positional-Base-Freqs, Uneven Positional base
Frequencies)). There is also a method to search for tRNA genes
(_fpref(SPIN-TRNA-Search, tRNA Search)).
It is also possible to perform subsequence or string searches 
(_fpref(SPIN-String-Search, String search)) and restriction enzyme searches
(_fpref(SPIN-Restrict-Introduction, Restriction enzyme search)). 
There are searches for start 
(_fpref(SPIN-Start-Codon-Search, Start Codon Search)) and stop codons 
(_fpref(SPIN-Stop-Codon-Search, Stop Codon Search)), splice junction
searches (_fpref(SPIN-Splice-Site-Search, Splice Site Search)), and
general motif searches using weight matrices (_fpref(SPIN-Weight-Matrix-Search, 
Motif Search)).

_split()
@node SPIN-Intro-Comparison-Functions
@section Summary of the Spin Comparison Functions

This section outlines the functions obtained from the Comparison menu.
All produce graphical and textual output. 
Using a score matrix, the "Find similar spans"
function compares every segment of one sequence with all those of the
other and reports those that reach a user defined score. The
segments are of a fixed length (span) set by the user
(_fpref(SPIN-Find similar spans, Finding Similar Spans)).
To look for short matching segments of any length, and allowing gaps, a
local dynamic programming routine can be used
(_fpref(SPIN-Local alignment, Aligning Sequences Locally)).
The fastest routine for locating segments of similarity (and generally
only suitable for DNA sequences) finds all identical subsequences (or words)
(_fpref(SPIN-Find matching words, Finding Matching Words)).
For a quick global comparison of sequences using a combination of the
Matching Words and Matching Spans algorithms the "Find best
diagonals" algorithm can be used
(_fpref(SPIN-Find Best Diagonals, Finding the Best Diagonals)).
Global alignments can be produced and plotted using a dynamic programming
algorithm 
(_fpref(SPIN-Align Sequences, Aligning Sequences Globally)).

@page
_split()
@node SPIN-Intro-Interface
@section Introduction to the Spin User Interface

@menu
* SPIN-Intro-Interface-plot::                          The SPIN Sequence Plot
* SPIN-Intro-Interface-seq::                      The SPIN Sequence Display
* SPIN-Intro-Interface-comparison-plot::         The SPIN Sequence Comparison Plot
* SPIN-Intro-Interface-sequence-comparison-display::           The SPIN Sequence Comparison Display
@end menu

Spin has several main displays. The first is
a top level window from which all the main options are selected and
which receives textual results. 
Most analytical functions which operate on single sequences
add their graphical results to a "SPIN Sequence Plot" that is associated 
with the sequence being analysed. (An exception is the restriction enzyme 
search which produces its own separate window.) Most functions which compare
pairs of sequences add their results to a "SPIN Sequence Comparison Plot".
The SPIN Sequence Plot and the SPIN Sequence Comparison Plot each have
associated sequence display windows: the Sequence Display and the 
Sequence Comparison Display. These allow the text of the sequences to be
viewed and use cursors to show the corresponding positions in the graphical
displays.

Spin is
best operated using a three button mouse, but alternative keybindings
are available. Full details of the user interface
are described elsewhere
(_fpref(UI-Introduction, User Interface, t)), and here we give an
introduction based around a series of screenshots.

The main window (shown below) contains an Output Window for
textual results, an Error window for error messages, and a series of
menus arranged along the top
(_fpref(SPIN-Intro-Menus, Spin menus,t)).
The contents of the two text windows can
be searched, edited and saved. Each set of results is preceded by
a header containing the time and date when it was generated.

_lpicture(spin_translate_t)

As can be seen 
the main menu bar contains File, View, Options, Sequences, Statistics,
Translation, Comparison, Search and Emboss menus.
In general most functions add their graphical results to a 
"SPIN Sequence Plot", but those obtained from the Comparison menu add
their results to a "SPIN Sequence Comparison Plot".

@page
_split()
@node SPIN-Intro-Interface-plot
@subsection Introduction to the Spin Plot

Most of the spin functions display their results in a 
two-dimensional plot called a "spin plot" (_fpref(SPIN-Spin-Plot, Spin plot)).
Sets of matches from a single invocation of a
function are termed "a result".  Each result is plotted using
a single colour which can be configured via the results manager
(_fpref(SPIN-Result-Manager, Result manager)). 

The figure shown below shows a spin plot window containing the results of
a gene search method based on codon usage, superimposed on a search for
stop codons
(_fpref(SPIN-Codon-Usage-Method, Codon Usage Method)). 
Each plot window contains a cross hair. Its x position is shown
in sequence base numbers in the left hand box above the plot, and the y
coordinate, expressed using the score values of the gene search, is
shown in the right hand box.

_lpicture(spin_plot_p)

At the right hand side of each panel is a set of square boxes with the
same colours as the lines drawn in the adjacent plot. These
icon-like objects represent individual results and allow the user to 
operate on them. For example at the right of the middle panel is a
pop-up menu containing the items: "Information", "List results",
"Configure", "Hide" and "Remove". 
(_fpref(SPIN-Result-Manager, Result manager)).

These icons can also be used to
drag and drop the results to which they correspond. This is activated by
pressing the middle mouse button, or Alt left mouse button, 
over the box and then moving the cursor
over the spin plot to the new location or anywhere outside the spin plot
(_fpref(SPIN-DRAG, Drag and drop))

Each spin plot window also contains a cursor that denotes the position of
the cursor in the Sequence display window 
(_fpref(SPIN-Sequence-Display, Spin Sequence Display)).
The user can move a cursor by clicking and dragging 
with the middle mouse button, or Alt left mouse button.
This will move the cursor in the sequence display and all other cursors displayed
that relate to the sequence.

The graphical results can be zoomed and scrolled in both x and y
directions. Zooming is achieved using the X and Y scale bars at the top
left hand corner of the plot. The individual plots can be scrolled in y
using the scroll bars attached to their right hand edge. The sequence
can be scrolled using the scroll bar at the base of the plot.

To illustrate further uses of the program we include some more screen
dumps below.

_lpicture(spin_restrict_enzymes_p)

The figure above shows the results of a search for restriction enzymes
(_fpref(SPIN-Restrict-Introduction, Restriction enzyme search)).

_lpicture(spin_plot_base_comp_p)

The figure above is a plot of the base composition of a sequence.

_lpicture(spin_weight_matrix)

The figure above shows the way in which the results of
weight matrix searches for motifs are plotted
(_fpref(SPIN-Weight-Matrix-Search, Motif Search)).

_lpicture(spin_splice)


The figure about shows the way in which the results of
searches for splice junctions are plotted. The donor and acceptor
predictions are separated and a different colour is used for each
reading frame
(_fpref(SPIN-Splice-Site-Search, Splice Site Search)).

_lpicture(spin_base_bias_p)

The figure above shows a method for finding protein coding regions which
does not distinguish reading frame or strand
(_fpref(SPIN-Uneven-Positional-Base-Freqs, Uneven Positional base
Frequencies)).


_lpicture(spin_trna_t)

The figure above shows how results from the tRNA gene search function
are displayed in the Output window
(_fpref(SPIN-TRNA-Search, tRNA Search)).


_split()
@node SPIN-Intro-Interface-seq
@subsection Introduction to the Spin Sequence Display

Spin also has a sequence display window in which the user can view the
sequence in
textual form. This window allows the user to scroll along the sequence.
Users can view one or both strands,
can switch on displays of the encoded amino acids in up to six reading
frames, can switch on a display of the restriction enzyme sites, and can
perform other simple subsequence or string searches to locate features in the
sequence. In the figure shown below the user has switched on a three
phase translation on the top strand, double stranded sequence, and a
restriction enzyme search.

_lpicture(spin_sequence_display_t)

The sequence cursor can be under the control of the graphics
cursor i.e. the cursor in the sequence viewer can be moved by the user
dragging the cursor in the graphics window. Similarly the cursor in the
graphics plots can be moved by the sequence viewer cursor.


@page
_split()
@node SPIN-Intro-Interface-comparison-plot
@subsection Introduction to the Spin Sequence Comparison Plot

All of the spin comparison 
functions display their results as points or lines in a 
two-dimensional plot called a "Spin Sequence Comparison Plot" (_fpref(SPIN-SPIN Sequence Comparison Plot, Spin Sequence Comparison Plot)).
Sets of matches from a single invocation of a
comparison command are termed "a result".  Each result is plotted using
a single colour which can be configured via the results manager
(_fpref(SPIN-Result-Manager, Result manager)). 

_lpicture(spin_dot_plot)

The diagram above shows the results of a "Find similar spans" search (olive)
(_fpref(SPIN-Find similar spans, Finding Similar Spans)), and a "Find
matching words" 
(red) (_fpref(SPIN-Find matching words, Finding Matching Words)).

At the right hand side is a set of square boxes with the
same colours as the dots drawn in the adjacent plot. These
icon-like objects represent individual results and allow the user to 
operate on them. For example clicking with the right mouse button brings
up the pop-up menu beneath the "matching words"
result contains the results menu for this result
(_fpref(SPIN-Result-Manager, Result manager)).
These icons can also be used to
drag and drop the results to which they correspond. This is activated by
pressing the middle mouse button, or Alt left mouse button, 
over the box and then moving the cursor
over the Spin Sequence Comparison Plot to the new location or anywhere outside the Spin Sequence Comparison Plot
(_fpref(SPIN-Drag, Drag and drop)).

Crosshairs can be turned on or off using the check button labelled
"crosshairs". The x and y positions of the crosshairs are indicated in
the two boxes to the right of the check box.

Each sequence displayed in a Spin Sequence Comparison Plot will have a cursor 
of a particular colour. In the picture above, the sequence on the horizontal
axis has a vertical blue cursor whereas the sequence on the vertical axis has 
a horizontal olive green cursor. In general, 
the same sequence displayed in several Spin Sequence Comparison Plots will have
a cursor of the same colour.
The user can move a cursor by clicking and dragging 
with the middle mouse button, or with Alt left mouse button.
This will move all other
cursors displayed that relate to the sequence, whether they are in
different Spin Sequence Comparison Plots or within the sequence display.

Plots can be enlarged either by resizing the window or zooming. Zooming
is achieved by holding down the control key and right mouse button and
dragging out a rectangle. This process can be repeated.
The Back button will restore the plot to the previous magnification. 

To illustrate further uses of the program we include some more screen
dumps below.


_lpicture(spin_plot)

The picture above shows the results after performing a "Find similar spans"
comparison between the three reading frames of two DNA sequences, producing 
nine superimposed sets of results.

@page
_lpicture(spin_local_p1)

Local alignment searches join similar segments with lines. The above
screen dump shows such an analysis in which 
genomic DNA containing 7 exons and is compared to
its corresponding cDNA.


_lpicture(spin_align_p)

The above screendump shows a global alignment of the same pair of
sequences.

_split()
@node SPIN-Intro-Interface-sequence-comparison-display
@subsection Introduction to the Spin Sequence Comparison Display

A sequence comparison display is associated with a single set of results 
and can be invoked by bringing up a pop
up menu for the required result, either from the Results manager
(_fpref(SPIN-Result-Manager, Result manager)), the Results
menu in the Spin Sequence Comparison Plot, or the coloured square icon on the 
right of the plot.

_lpicture(spin_seq_display)

The horizontal sequence is drawn above the vertical sequence and the 
central panel indicates characters which are
identical. The buttons (< >) and (<< >>) scroll the sequences.
Pressing the Lock
button forces the sequences to scroll together.
Movement of the sequences is also controlled by the scrollbars or by
moving the corresponding cursor in the Spin Sequence Comparison Plot.
The black cursors in the sequence display 
correspond to the position of the cursor in the Spin Sequence Comparison Plot. The sequences can be
made to 'jump' to the nearest match in those results by pressing the 
"Nearest match" or "Nearest dot" buttons.
