_split()
@node SPIN-Restrict-Introduction
@section Restriction enzyme search
@menu
* SPIN-Restrict-Selecting::          Selecting enzymes
* SPIN-Restrict-Examining::          Examining the plot
* SPIN-Restrict-Reconfig::           Reconfiguring the plot
@end menu

_split()
@cindex Restriction enzymes: introduction: spin

The restriction enzyme map function finds and displays restriction sites
found within a specified region of a sequence. Users can select the enzyme
types to search for.

_lpicture(spin_restrict_enzymes_p)

This figure shows a typical view of the Restriction Enzyme Map function
in which the results for most enzyme types are shown as black vertical
lines opposite the enzyme names, but in which some of the enzymes sites
have been configured by the user to be drawn in different colours.
If no
result is found for any particular enzyme eg here AccIII, the line will
still be drawn so that zero cutters can be identified. 
The results
can be scrolled vertically (and horizontally if the plot is zoomed in).
A ruler is shown along the base and the current cursor (the vertical
black line) position is shown in the left hand box near the top right of
the display.  If the user clicks, in turn, on two restriction sites
their separation in base pairs will appear in the top right hand box.
Information about the last site touched is shown in the Information line
at the bottom of the display.

_split()
@node SPIN-Restrict-Selecting
@subsection Selecting Enzymes
@cindex Restriction enzymes: selecting enzymes: spin

Files of restriction enzyme names and their cut sites are stored in disk
files. For the format of these files see 
_fref(Formats-Restriction, Restriction enzyme files, restriction_enzymes)
Standard four-cutter, six-cutter and all-enzymes files are available and
the users can use their own "personal" files.  To create your own file
of enzymes you may need to extract the information from the currently
defined files. These are pointed to by the @code{RENZYM.4},
@code{RENZYM.6} and @code{RENZYM.ALL} environment variables.

_picture(spin_restrict_enzymes_d)

When the file is read the list of enzymes is displayed in a scrolling
window.  To select enzymes press and drag the left mouse button within
the list.  Dragging the mouse off the bottom of the list will scroll to
allow selection of a range larger than the displayed section of the
list.  When the left button is pressed any existing selection is
cleared. To select several disjoint entries in the list press control
and the left mouse button. Once the enzymes have been chosen, pressing
OK will create the plot.

_split()
@node SPIN-Restrict-Examining
@subsection Examining the Plot
@cindex Restriction enzymes: examining the plot: spin

Positioning the cursor over a match will cause its name and cut position
to appear in the information line.  If the right mouse button is pressed
over a match, a popup menu containing Information and Configure will
appear. The Information function in this menu will display the data for
this cut site and enzyme in the output window.

It is possible to find the distance between any two cut sites.  Pressing
the left mouse button on a match will display "Select another cut" at
the bottom of the window.  Then, pressing the left button on another
match will display the distance, in bases, between the two sites. This
is shown in a box located at the top right corner of the window.

_split()
@node SPIN-Restrict-Reconfig
@subsection Reconfiguring the Plot
@cindex Configure: restriction enzymes: spin
@cindex Restriction enzymes: configuring: spin

The plot displays the results for each restriction enzyme on a separate
line.  Enzymes with no sites are also shown.  The order of these lines
may be changed by pressing and dragging the middle mouse button, or Alt
left mouse button, on one
of the displayed names at the left side of the screen. For example the
figure below shows the results seen above but after the coloured 
(i.e. non-black) rows of sites have been dragged and dropped to be
vertically adjacent.

_lpicture(spin_restrict_enzymes_p1)

The results are plotted as black lines but users can select colours for
each enzyme type by pressing the right button on any of its matches.  A
menu containing Information and Configure will pop up. Configure will
display a colour selection dialogue.  Adjusting the colour here will
adjust the colour for all matches found with this restriction enzyme.

_split()
@node SPIN-Restrict-Printing
@subsection Printing the sites
@cindex Restriction site printing:spin
@cindex Restriction site listing:spin

From the Result manager (_fpref(SPIN-Result-Manager, Result manager)),
menu a pop-up menu for restriction sites results can be used to write
the results in two forms to the the Output window - from here the
results can be saved to a file. The two choices of format are "Output
enzyme by enzyme" and "Output ordered on position", brief examples of
which are shown below. The output also appears in an "Information" window.
Note that these listings are also available from
gap4. 

The restriction enzyme results output ordered "enzyme by enzyme".
The enzymes
sites are numbered and named and the actual cut site from the sequence
is written, followed by the position of the cut, the fragment size, and
finally a sorted list of fragment sizes. 
A list of zero cutters is written underneath.

@example

  Matches found=     1 
      Name            Sequence                 Position Fragment lengths
    1 ApaLI           G'TGCAC                      3506   3505   3505 
                                                          4629   4629 
  Matches found=     8                         
      Name            Sequence                 Position Fragment lengths
    1 ApoI            A'AATTC                      1939   1938    184 
    2 ApoI            G'AATTT                      2632    693    339 
    3 ApoI            A'AATTT                      2996    364    364 
    4 ApoI            G'AATTC                      3180    184    419 
    5 ApoI            A'AATTT                      5283   2103    639 
    6 ApoI            G'AATTC                      5702    419    693 
    7 ApoI            A'AATTC                      6341    639   1455 
    8 ApoI            A'AATTC                      7796   1455   1938 
                                                           339   2103 
  Matches found=     2                         
      Name            Sequence                 Position Fragment lengths
    1 AseI            AT'TAAT                      1790   1789    435 
    2 AseI            AT'TAAT                      2225    435   1789 

Zero cutters:
      Acc65I
      AccIII
      AclNI
      AhdI
      ApaI
      AscI
      Asp700I
      Asp718I
      AspEI
      AsuNHI
      AvrII
                                                          5910   5910 
@end example


The restriction enzyme results output ordered on position. The enzymes
sites are numbered and named and the actual cut site from the sequence
is written, followed by the position of the cut, the fragment size, and
finally a sorted list of cut sizes.

@example

============================================================
Wed 19 Nov 15:42:38 1997: Restriction enzymes result list
------------------------------------------------------------
Sequence /nfs/skye/home10/rs/work/doc/spin/atpase.dat
Number of enzymes = 80
Number of matches = 597
      Name            Sequence                 Position Fragment lengths
    1 AspLEI          GCG'C                         157    156      0 
    2 AccII           CG'CG                         313    156      0 
    3 AspLEI          GCG'C                         313      0      0 
    4 AviII           TGC'GCA                       322      9      0 
    5 AspLEI          GCG'C                         323      1      0 
    6 AsuHPI          'CGCTTTATCACC                 342     19      0 
    7 AflIII          A'CGCGT                       362     20      0 
    8 AccII           CG'CG                         364      2      0 
    9 BcgI            'AACAGGGTTAGCAGAAAAGTCG       389     25      0 
   10 BcgI            GCAGAAAAGTCGCAATTGTATGCA'     423     34      0 
   11 AsuHPI          'CATTTATTCACC                 440     17      0 
   12 AspLEI          GCG'C                         486     46      0 
   13 AciI            C'CGC                         502     16      0 
   14 AciI            G'CGG                         552     50      0 
   15 AccII           CG'CG                         552      0      0 
   16 AclI            AA'CGTT                       614     62      0 

@end example
