@menu
* Template-Display::            Template Display
* Template-Templates::          Reading and Template Plot
* Template-Templates-Display::  Reading and Template Plot Display
* Template-Templates-Options::  Reading and Template Plot Options
* Template-Templates-Operations:: Reading and Template Plot Operations
* Template-Quality::            Quality Plot
* Template-Restriction::        Restriction Enzyme Plot
* Consistency-Display::         Consistency Display
* SNP-Candidates::              SNP Candidates
@end menu

_split()

Gap4 provides views of the data for an assembly project at 3 levels of
resolution: the whole project can be seen from the Contig Selector 
(_fpref(Contig Selector, Contig Selector, Contig Selector)),
the most detail from the Contig Editor
(_fpref(Editor, Editing in gap4, contig_editor)), and the Contig
Overview Displays, described in this section, provide an intermediate
level of information and data manipulation. 
They are available from the main gap4 View menu.


These middle level resolution displays provide graphical overviews of
individual contigs or sets of contigs.  The possible
information shown includes readings, templates, tags, restriction enzyme
sites, stop codons, plots of the consensus quality, read coverage,
read-pair coverage, strand coverage and consensus confidence.
The displays of readings, templates, tags, restriction enzyme
sites and plots of the consensus quality can be shown in a single
window called the Template Display 
(_fpref(Template-Display, Template Display, template)).
The plots of reading coverage, read-pair coverage, strand coverage and
consensus confidence can be shown in a single display called the
Consistency Display
(_fpref(Consistency-Display, Consistency Display, consistency_display)),
or as separate plots.
The Stop Codon Plot 
(_fpref(Stops, Plotting Stop Codons, stops))
and a more informative version of the Restriction Enzyme Plot
(_fpref(Restrict, Plotting Restriction Enzymes, restrict_enzymes))
can be shown in separate windows.

@node Template-Display
@section Template Display
@cindex Template Display

@menu
* Template-Templates::          Reading and Template Plot
* Template-Templates-Display::  Reading and Template Plot Display
* Template-Templates-Options::  Reading and Template Plot Options
* Template-Templates-Operations:: Reading and Template Plot Operations
* Template-Quality::            Quality Plot
* Template-Restriction::        Restriction Enzyme Plot
@end menu

The Template Display can show schematic plots of 
readings, templates, tags, restriction enzyme
sites and the consensus quality. It can be used to reorder contigs,
create tags and invoke the Contig Editor. 
It is invoked from the main gap4 View menu.

An example showing all these information types can be seen in the Figure below.


_lpicture(template.display)

The large top section contains lines and arrows representing readings
and templates. Beneath this are rulers;
one for each contig, and below those is the quality plot. 
The template and reading section of the display is in two parts. The top
part contains the templates which have been sequenced from both ends but
which are in some way inconsistent - for example given the current
relative positions of their readings, they may have a length that is
larger or greater than that expected, or the two readings may, as it
were, face away from one another. Colour coding is used to distinguish
between different types of inconsistency, and whether or not the
inconsistency involves readings within or between contigs. For example,
most of the problems shown in the screendump above are coloured
dark yellow, indicating an inconsistency between a pair of contigs.
The rest of the data, (mostly dark blue indicating templates sequenced
from only one end), is plotted below the data for the inconsistent
templates.
Forward readings are blue and reverse readings are orange.
Templates in bright yellow have been sequenced from both ends, are consistent and
span a pair of contigs (and so indicate the relative orientation and
separation of the contigs). 

The coloured blocks immediately above and below the ruler are tags.
Those above the ruler 
can also be seen on their corresponding readings in the large top
section. Zooming is available. The position of a crosshair
is shown in the two left most boxes in the top right hand corner. The leftmost
shows the distance in bases between the crosshair and the start of the contig
underneath the crosshair. The middle box shows the distance between the
crosshair and the start of the first contig. The right box shows the distance
between two selected cut sites in the restriction enzyme plots.

_picture(template.dialogue)

As seen in the dialogue above,
users can choose to display a single contig, all contigs, or a subset of 
contigs from a file of filenames ("file") or a list ("list"). If either the
file or list options are chosen, the "browse" button will be activated and can
be used to call up a file or list browser dialogue.

The items to be shown in the initial template display can be selected from the
list of checkboxes. The default is to display all templates and readings.
However, it is possible to display only templates with more than one reading 
("Ignore 'single' templates) or templates with both forward and reverse 
readings ("Show only read pairs"). These latter two options may be beneficial 
if the database is very large.

In the section below we give details about the individual components of
the overall Template Display.

_split()
@node Template-Templates
@subsection Reading and Template Plot
@cindex Template Display: reading plot
@cindex Template Display: template plot
@cindex Template plot: template display
@cindex Reading plot: template display
@cindex Ignore single templates: template display
@cindex Template display: ignore single templates
@cindex Show only read pairs: template display
@cindex Template display: show only read pairs

@menu
* Template-Templates-Display::  Reading and Template Plot Display
* Template-Templates-Options::  Reading and Template Plot Options
* Template-Templates-Operations:: Reading and Template Plot Operations
@end menu

The Reading and Template Plot shows templates and readings. The
following sections describe the display, its options, and the operations
which it can be used to perform.
It is invoked from the main gap4 View menu.

@node Template-Templates-Display
@subsubsection Reading and Template Plot Display

The Reading and Template Plot shows templates and readings.  Colour is used to
provide additional information.
The reading colour is used to convey the primer
information. The default colours are:

@table @var
@item red
primer unknown
@item green
forwards primer
@item orange
reverse primer
@item dark_cyan
custom forward primer
@item orange-red
custom reverse primer
@end table

Colour is used to distinguish the number and the location
of the readings derived from each template.
Templates with readings derived from only one end are drawn in blue. 
Those with readings from both ends
are pink when both ends are contained within the same contig.
Those with readings from both ends are green when
the readings are in different contigs and one of 
the contigs is not being plotted.

For each template gap4 stores an expected length, as a range between two
values. From an assembly it is often possible to work out the actual length of
a template based upon the positions within a contig of readings sequenced
using the forward and reverse primers. The forward and reverse readings on
a single template (called a read pair) are considered to be inconsistent if 
this observed distance is outside of
the range of acceptable sizes and then the template is drawn in black. 
Alternatively it may be possible that both forward and reverse readings are 
assembled on the same strand (in which case both arrows will point in the same
direction). This too is a problem and hence the templates are drawn in
black. 

If more than one contig is displayed then the distance between adjacent 
contigs is determined from any read pair information. If there are spanning 
templates between two adjacent contigs and the readings on that template are 
consistent, i.e. are in the correct orientation, the template is coloured yellow. 
Templates which span non-adjacent contigs in the display or contain 
inconsistent readings are coloured dark yellow.

A summary of the default template colours follows.

@table @var
@item blue
the template contains only readings from one end
@item pink
the template contains both forward and reverse readings in the same contig
@item green
the template contains both forward and reverse readings, but they are in
separate contigs, and one of the contigs is not being displayed.
@item black
the readings on the template are within the same contig but are in
contradictory orientations or are an unexpected distance apart
@item yellow
the readings on the template are within different contigs (both of which are being displayed) and are consistent
@item dark_yellow
the readings on the template are within different contigs (both of which are being displayed) and are inconsistent
@end table

@cindex Ruler: template display
@cindex Contig: template display
@cindex Template display: ruler
@cindex Template display: contig

If more than one contig is displayed, the contigs are positioned in the same
left to right order as the input contig list, (which need not necessarily be in
the same order as the contig selector).
Overlapping contigs are drawn as staggered lines. 
If the user selects the "Calculate contig positions" option from the menu
the horizontal distance between adjacent contigs is
determined from any available read pair information. 
Otherwise, or in the absence of any read pair
information, the second contig is positioned immediately following the first
contig, but will be drawn staggered in the vertical direction. If the 
readings on a template spanning two contigs are consistent, the distance 
between the contigs is determined using the template's mean length.
If there are several templates spanning a pair of contigs
an average distance is calculated and used as the final 
offset between the contigs. 
Templates which span non-adjacent contigs or contain inconsistent readings 
are not used in the calculation of the contig offsets. It is possible that 
data in the database is inconsistent to such an extent that, although spanning 
templates have consistent readings, the averaging can lead to a display which 
shows the templates to have inconsistent readings, eg the readings are 
pointing in opposite directions. 

A summary of the templates and readings used to calculate the distance 
between two contigs is displayed in the output window. An example is given 
below:

@example
============================================================
Wed 02 Apr 10:35:51 1997: template display
------------------------------------------------------------
Contig zf98g12.r1(651) and Contig zf23d2.s1(348) 
Template       zf22h7( 376) length 1893
Reading        zf22h7.r1(  +10R), pos   6257 +208, contig  651
Reading        zf22h7.s1( -376F), pos    145 +331, contig  348
Template       zf49f5( 536) length 1510
Reading        zf49f5.r1( +255R), pos   6562 +239, contig  651
Reading        zf49f5.s1( -536F), pos    227 +135, contig  348
Gap between contigs = -11
Offset of contig 348 from the beginning = 7674
@end example

The contig names and numbers are given in the top line. Below this, the
spanning template name, number and length is displayed. Below this the reading
name, whether the reading has been complemented (+: original -: complemented),
number, primer information, starting position, length and contig number. This
is of similar format to that displayed by the read pairs output.
_fxref(ReadPair-Output, Find Read Pairs, read_pairs) The average gap between
the contigs is given and finally the distance in bases between the start of
the second contig and the start of the left most contig in the display.

_split()
@node Template-Templates-Options
@subsubsection Reading and Template Plot Options
@cindex Template display: tags
@cindex Template display: select tags
@cindex Select tags: template display
@cindex Tags: template display


_lpicture(template.display)

Within the figure shown above the contents of the View menu are visible. The 
"Templates", "Readings", "Quality Plot" and "Restriction Enzyme Plot" commands
control which attributes are displayed. The graphics are always scaled to fit the
information within the window size, subject to the current zoom level. This
means that turning off templates, but leaving readings displayed, will improve
visibility of the reading information.

The "Ruler ticks" checkbox determines whether to draw numerical ticks on the 
contigs. The number of ticks is defined in the .gaprc
(_fpref(Conf-Introduction, Options Menu, configure)) file as NUM_TICKS 
although the actual number of ticks per contig that will be displayed
also depends on the space available on the screen.

The "ignore 'single' templates" toggle controls whether to display all 
templates or only those containing more than one reading. The "show only read 
pairs" toggle controls whether all templates or only those containing both 
forward and reverse readings are displayed.  Hence when set the templates 
displayed are those with a known (observed) length. The "Show only spanning
read pairs" toggle controls whether to display all templates or only those
containing forward and reverse readings which are in different contigs.

The plot can be enlarged or reduced using the standard zooming mechanism.
_fxref(UI-Graphics-Zoom, Zooming, interface)

The crosshair toggle button controls whether the cursor is visible. This is
shown as a black vertical line. The position of the crosshair is displayed
in the two boxes to the right of the crosshair toggle. The first box indicates
the cursor position in the current contig. The second box indicates the 
overall position of the cursor in the consensus. The third box is used to 
show the distance between restriction enzyme cut sites. 
_oxref(Template-Restriction, Restriction Enzyme Plot).

Tags that are on the consensus can only be seen on the ruler. These are
marked beneath the ruler line. Tags on readings can be seen both on the
ruler (above the line) and on their appropriate readings within the
template window. To configure the tag types that are shown use the
"select Tags" command in the View menu. This brings up the usual tag
selection dialog box. _fxref(Conf-Tag, Tag Selector, configure)


_split()
@node Template-Templates-Operations
@subsubsection Reading and Template Plot Operations

@cindex Readings list: template display
@cindex Template display: readings list
@cindex Template display: active readings


The contig editor can be invoked by double clicking the middle mouse button,
or Alt the left mouse button, 
in any of the displays, ie template, ruler, quality or restriction enzyme
plots. The editor will start up with the editing cursor on the base that 
corresponds to the position clicked on in the Template Display. If more than 
one contig is currently being displayed the editor decides which contig to show
using the following rules. If the user clicks on the Quality Plot, the contig
lines or the Restriction Enzyme Display, the corresponding contigs will
be shown. If the user clicks on a gap between these displays the nearest contig
will be selected. If the user clicks on
the template or reading lines, the editor will show the contig whose left
end is to the left of and closest to the cursor.

The long blue vertical line seen in the previous 
figure is the position of the 
editing cursor within a Contig Editor. Each editor will produce its own cursor
and each will be visible. Moving the editing 
cursor within a contig editor automatically moves its cursor within the 
Template Display. Similarly, clicking and dragging the editor cursor with the 
middle mouse button, or Alt left mouse button, within the Template
Display scrolls the associated Contig Editor.


The order of the contigs can be changed within the Template Display by
clicking with the middle mouse button, or Alt left mouse button, 
on a contig line and dragging the line to
the new position. The Template Display will update automatically once the 
mouse button is released. The change of a dark yellow template to bright
yellow is indicative that the two contigs are now in consistent positions
and orientations. The order of the contigs in the gap4 database, as 
displayed in the contig selector, can be updated by selecting the 
"Update contig order" command in the Edit menu.

By clicking on any of the contig lines in the ruler a popup menu is invoked.
From this, information on the contig can be obtained, the contig editor can be
started, the contig can be complemented, and the templates within the
contig can be highlighted (shown by changing their line width).

A list named @code{readings} always exists. It contains the
list of readings that are highlighted in all the currently shown
template displays.  _fxref(Lists, Lists, lists) The highlighting
mechanism used is to draw the readings as thicker, bolder, lines. The
"clear Active Readings" command from the View menu clears this list. The
"highlight reading list" command loads a new set of readings to use for
the "readings" list and then highlights these.

To interactively add and remove readings from the active list use the
left mouse button. Clicking on an individual reading will toggle its
state from active to non active and back again. Pressing and holding the
left mouse button, and moving the mouse, will drag out a bounding box.
When the button is released all readings that are contained entirely
within the bounding box will be toggled.

Activating a reading (using any of the above methods) when an editor is
running, will also highlight the reading within the editor. Similarly,
highlighting the reading in the editor activates it within the template
display and adds it to the active reading list.


_split()
@node Template-Quality
@subsection Quality Plot
@cindex Template display: quality plot
@cindex Quality plot: template display

This option can be invoked from the main gap4 View menu, in which case
it appears as a single plot, or from the View menu of the Template
Display, in which case it will appear as part of the Template Display.

This display provides an overview of the quality of the consensus. The
Contig Editor can be used to examine the problems revealed. A typical
plot is displayed below.

_lpicture(template.quality)

For each base in the consensus a quality is
computed based on the accuracy of the data on each strand. As can be seen in
the Figure above, this information
is then plotted using colour and height to distinguish between the
different quality assignments.
The colour and height codes are explained below.

@example
@group
Colour  Height          Meaning

grey    0 to 0          OK on both strands, both agree
blue    0 to 1          OK on plus strand only
green  -1 to 0          OK on minus strand only
red    -1 to 1          Bad on both strands
black  -2 to 2          OK on both strands but they disagree
@end group
@end example

For example, in the figure we see that the first four hundred or so
bases are mostly only well determined on the forward strand.

Note that when a large number of bases are being displayed the limited screen 
resolution causes the
quality codes for adjacent bases to be drawn as single pixels. However
the use of varying heights ensures that all problematic bases will be
visible. Hence when
the quality plot consists of a single grey line all known quality problems
have been resolved, at the current consensus and quality cutoffs.

To check problems the contig editor can be invoked by double clicking on the
middle mouse button, or Alt left mouse button. 
It will appear centred on the base corresponding to the
position on which the mouse was clicked.

The quality plot appears as "Calculate quality" in the Results Manager window
(_fpref(Results, Results Manager, results)).

Within the Results Manager commands available, using the right mouse
button, include "Information",
which lists a summary of
the distribution of quality types to the output window, and "List" which lists
the actual quality values for each base to the output window. These quality
values are written in a textual form of single letters per base and are listed
below.

@table @var
@item
@r{+Strand -Strand}
@item a
@r{Good    Good} (in agreement)
@item b
@r{Good    Bad}
@item c
@r{Bad     Good}
@item d
@r{Good    None}
@item e
@r{None    Good}
@item f
@r{Bad     Bad}
@item g
@r{Bad     None}
@item h
@r{None    Bad}
@item i
@r{Good    Good} (disagree)
@item j
@r{None    None}
@end table

An example of the output using "Information" and "List" follows.

@example
============================================================
Wed 02 Apr 12:14:06 1997: quality summary
------------------------------------------------------------
Contig xb56b6.s1 (#11)
 81.00 OK on both strands and they agree(a)
  3.94 OK on plus strand only(b,d)
 11.98 OK on minus strand only(c,e)
  1.85 Bad on both strands(f,g,h,j)
  1.22 OK on both strands but they disagree(i)
============================================================
Wed 02 Apr 12:14:09 1997: quality listing
------------------------------------------------------------
Contig xb56b6.s1 (#11)

          10         20         30         40         50         60
  eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeehee eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee

          70         80         90        100        110        120
  eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee

         130        140        150        160        170        180
  eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee

         190        200        210        220        230        240
  eeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeeee heeeeeeeee eeeeeeeici iiaiaciiia aaaaaaaaac

         250        260        270        280        290        300
  aaaacaaaaa aaaaaaaiia aaaaaaaaaa aaaaaaaaaa aaaabaaaaa aaaaaaaaaa

         310        320        330        340        350        360
  aaaaaaaaaa aaaaaaaaaa aaaaaaaaaa aaaaaaaaaa aaaaaaaaaa faaaaaaaaa

[ output removed for brevity ]
@end example

_split()
@node Template-Restriction
@subsection Restriction Enzyme Plot
@cindex Template display: restriction enzymes
@cindex Restriction enzymes: template display

The restriction enzyme plot within the template display is a reduced version
of the main Restriction Enzyme Map function. The dialogue used for choosing
the restriction enzymes is identical and is described with the main function.
_fxref(Restrict, Plotting Restriction Enzymes, restrict)
It is invoked from the Template Display View menu.
An example plot from the template display can be seen below.

_lpicture(template.restriction)

Here we see the searches for two restriction enzymes. Each vertical line is
drawn at the cut position of the matched restriction site. Unlike the main
restriction enzyme plot here all matches are plotted on a single
horizontal plot. Initially all sites are drawn in black. To distinguish one
site from another either touch the site with the mouse cursor and read the 
template
display information line, or place the mouse cursor above a site and press
the right mouse button. This pops up a menu containing "Information" and
"Configure". The "Configure" option can be used to change the colour of all
matches found for this enzyme. In the figure above we have changed
the initial colours for both of the restriction enzymes searched for. The
"Information" command displays information for all sites found in the text
output window.

As with the main Restriction Enzyme Map function, clicking the left mouse
button on two restriction sites in turn displays the distance between the
chosen sites in the information line. This figure is also displayed in the box
at the top right hand corner of the template display.

_include(consistency_display-t.texi)

_split
@node SNP-Candidates
@section SNP Candidates
@cindex SNP candidates
@cindex Haplotype assignment

The 2nd-Highest Confidence (_fpref(Consistency-2ndHighest, 2nd-Highest
Confidence, 2nd-Highest Confidence)) and the Diploid Graph
(_fpref(Consistency-Diploid, Diploid Graph, Diploid Graph) both plot
indicators of how likely an alignment column is to be made up of 2 or
more sequence populations.

By studying these in further detail we should be able to spot
correlated differences and to start assigning haplotypes. The SNP
Candidate plot initially brings up a dialogue asking for a single
contig and range. After selecting this a window is displayed showing
the likely locations of SNPs as seen below.

_lpicture(snp_candidates1)

The top row of this has controls to define how the 2nd-Highest
Confidence or Diploid Graph results are analysed in order to pick
candidate locations for SNPs.

Going from right to left, the ``2 alleles only'' toggle switches
between the two algorithms; when enabled it uses the additional
assumption coded into the Diploid Graph of their being only two
populations in approximately 50:50 ratio. Next the minimum base
quality may be adjusted. Any difference with a poorer quality than
this is completely ignored. The minimum discrepancy score is a
threshold (with high indicating a strong SNP) applied to the results
of the consistency plot results. A spike in this plot needs to be at
least as high as this score to be accepted. This score is then
adjusted for immediate proximity to other SNPs (e.g. it forms a run of
bases) and this adjusted score is compared against the minimum SNP
score parameter. Typically this can be left low. If any of these
parameters are modified press the ``Recalculate candidate SNPs''
button to recompute.

The large central panel contains a vertically scrolled representation
of the candidate SNPs found. By default the left-most plot contains a
pictorial view of the sequence depth. Next to this is a vertical ruler
showing the relative positions of candidate SNPs. Both of these two
plots are to scale based on the sequence itself. To the right of these
come a series of text based items with one row per candidate
SNP. Initially this consists only of a check button (``Use''),
Position, Score and the frequency of base types observed at that
consensus column. Double clicking on any row will bring up the contig
editor at that position showing the potential SNP. You may manually
curate which ones you consider to be true or not by enabling or
disabling it use the ``Use'' checkbox on that row. The score may also
be manually adjusted allowing certain differences to be forced apart
by using a very high score.

The second row from the top contains a row of options controlling how
the correlation between candidate SNPs is used to assign
haplotypes. For every template in the contig the algorithm produces a
fake sequence consistencing only of the bases considered to be a
candidate SNP and enabled by having the ``Use'' checkbox set. These
fake sequences are then clustered to form groups. No re-alignment is
performed as the existing multiple alignment has already been made
(although you may wish to run the Shuffle Pads algorithm before hand
if the existing sequence alignment is poor).

This is a fairly standard clustering algorithm that starts with each
sequence being the sole member of a set. All sets are compared with
each other and then the overlaps are ranked by score. The best scoring
sets are then merged together. If Fast Mode is not being used the
merged set is then compared against everything else once more to
obtain new scores, otherwise a simple adjustment is guessed
at. Skipping this step speeds up the algorithm considerably and
generally gives sufficient results; hence the Fast Mode toggle. This
process is repeated until no two sets have an overlap score of greater
than or equal to the ``Minimum merge score''.

The Filter Templates button brings up a new dialogue box containing an
editable list (initially blank) of template names. Adding a template
name here will force this template to be ignored by the clustering
algorithm. You may also enter reading names here too and they will be
automatically converted to template names, hence filtering out all
other readings from the same template. If you or suspect specific
templates from being chimeric then this is where they should be listed.

The Cluster by SNPs button starts the clustering process running. It
cannot be interrupted and may take a few minutes. After completion the
``Sets'' component (rightmost) of the central plot is updated as seen
in the below screenshot. Each set is a group of templates clustered
together based on the candidate SNPs. They are sorted in left to right
order such that the left-most set contains the most number of
templates and the right most set contains the fewest. The consensus
for members of that set is displayed in each square and the quality of
the consensus is shown in a similar fashion to the contig editor, with
white being good quality and dark grey being poor (usually due to
being low coverage within that set).

The background to the entire row is also shaded to indicate the
observed quality of that SNP in the context of this clustering. A
white background indicates that two or more sets exist with high
quality consensus bases (>= quality 90) that differ. A light grey
background is used where the consensus bases differ but not with high
quality bases. A dark grey background is used to indicate that the
consensus in all sets covering that SNP candidate agree. This
typically happens when either the clustering has failed or when a
candidate SNP is not a real indicator of which haplotype a sequence
belongs to, such as a base calling error or a random fluctuation in
homopolymer length. If you wish to force this SNP to be used for
clustering then try increasing its score and re-clustering again.

_lpicture(snp_candidates2)

Hence in the above example we see two distinct good quality sets made
from the SNPs between 1503 and 2334 and two more good quality sets
from 12039 onwards. This indicates that we have no templates where one
end spans SNPs in the 1503-2334 region and the other end spans SNPs in
the 12039 onwards region. We also have a series of smaller sets which
probably arise due to incorrect base calls or more rarely due to
chimeras.

Now if we double click to get the contig editor up it will display an
additional window labelled ``Tabs''. NOTE: this does not happen if a
contig editor for this contig is already being displayed. If so shut
that one down first. Notice that the sequence names are also
coloured. This indicates the set the sequence has been assigned
to. The picture below also has the ``Highlight Disagreements'' mode
enabled with a difference quality cutoff sufficient set to match the
one used in the SNP Candidates plot. Two clear SNP positions can be
seen.

_lpicture(contig_editor_sets)

The tabs window lists the set numbers and their size (except for
``All''). Selecting a set will show just sequences from that set. This
allows for the set consensus and quality values to be viewed. The
editor also allows for sequences to be moved from one set to another,
but for now this is purely serves a visual purpose and the movements
are not passed back to the main SNP candidates window (although this
is an obvious change to make).

Moving back to the main SNP Candidates window note that we have a
series of selection buttons at the bottom of the window. These control
automatic selection of rows (SNPs) based on their quality assigned by
observing the set consensus sequences. The clustering algorithm only
works on selected sets so this allows for poor quality SNPs to be
removed from further calculations. Additionally to simplify the view
unselected SNPs may be removed by pressing the ``Remove unselected'' button.

Above each set has a checkbutton above it (not visible in the
screenshot). Initially these are not enabled, but they indicate which
sets certain operations should be performed on. Pressing the right
mouse button over a set (or a set checkbox) brings up a menu
indicating the following operations.

@table @strong
@item Delete set
@itemx Merge selected sets
This removes either the clicked upon set or all enabled sets (those
that have their checkbox set) from the display.
@sp 1
@item Save this consensus
@itemx Save consensus for selected sets
This brings up a dialogue box allowing the consensus for a single or
selected sets to be saved in FASTA format. The set numbers is a space
separated list of numbers representing the sets to save, starting
with the leftmost set being numbered as 1. Initially this is either
the one you clicked on or all the selected ones, but it may be edited
in this dialogue too prior to saving. Strip pads removes padding
characters ('*') from the consensus.

``Incorporate ungrouped templates'' controls how template sequences
that were not assigned to at least one set are dealt with. It could be
considered that sequences covering regions where no SNPs have been
detected should be included when computing the consensus, and this is
the default action. However this can be disabled such that only
sequences that were specifically used for breaking the assembly apart
into sets form the consensus.
@sp 1
@item Produce fofn for this set
@itemx Produce fofn for selected sets
These options allow a file or list of reading names to be
saved. A single fofn is produced but multiple sets may be grouped
together in one fofn. Here the set number ``0'' is a placeholder for
all of the sequences that were not assigned to a set.
@end table

The final set of controls to discuss in the SNP Candidates window
control the splitting of sets into contigs. This is a one-way action
which cannot be undone, so make sure you backup the database using
Copy Database before hand.

The ``Split sets to contigs'' button moves the readings in each
selected set to its own contig. In some cases a set may be
non-contiguous. Remember that templates are assigned to sets, but a
template may often only have the end sequence known with the middle
portion being unsequenced. Gap4 does not currently handle scaffolds
and super-contigs so in order to keep such sets held together in a
single contig the ``Add fake consensus'' option may be used. This adds
an additional sequence to the contig that contains the consensus for
the set (including from readings that were unassigned). This also
handily means that new contigs produced from multiple sets are already
aligned and base coordinates are directly comparable. Hence two such sets may
be viewed in the Join Editor by typing their names into the main Join
Contigs dialogue. (Find Internal Joins will attempt to realign the
contigs and often fails if the set contains many regions of unknown
consensus.)

