@node Trev
@section Introduction
@cindex Trev: introduction

@cindex Trev 
@menu
* Trev-Opening::                Opening trace files
* Trev-View::                   Viewing the trace
* Trev-Searching::              Searching
* Trev-Information::            Information
* Trev-Editing::                Editing
* Trev-Save::                   Saving a trace file
* Trev-Files::                  Processing multiple files
* Trev-Print::                  Printing a trace
* Trev-Quit::                   Quitting Trev
@ifset standalone
* Index::			Index
@end ifset
@end menu

_include(trev_mini-t.texi)

_split()
@node Trev-Opening
@section Opening trace files
@cindex Trev: opening trace files
@cindex Opening trace files: Trev

Trace files can be opened either on the command line or from within Trev.  
In both cases it is possible to open several traces at once. In this case trev
will add Next File, Previous File and Goto File buttons to allow quick
navigation between traces.

On the command line, this is simply done by specifying several files. With the
"Open" dialogue from within trev multiple files may be selected by dragging
with the left mouse button or using shift+left button and control+left button
to extend regions or to toggle loading of individual files.

@node Trev-Opening-Command
@subsection Opening a trace file from the command line
@cindex Command line arguments: Trev

@table @code
usage: trev [-@{ABI,ALF,EXP,SCF,PLN,Any@}] [-edits @var{value}]
[-editscf] [-xmag @var{value}] [-ymag @var{value}] [-restrict]
[@var{tracefilename} ...]

@sp 1
@item -ABI, -ALF, -EXP, -SCF, -PLN, -Any
Optional. Defaults to Any. These define the possible input trace formats
available. Currently these are 'ABI', 'ALF', experiment
(_fpref(Formats-Exp, Experiment File, formats)), 'SCF'
(_fpref(Formats-Scf, scf, formats)), plain ASCII text or 'any' in which case
the program attempts to establish the file format from information
contained within the trace file. 

@sp 1
@item -edits @var{value}
Optional. Defaults to 1. If @var{value} is 1, the trace sequence can be
edited. If @var{value} is 0, no edit line is displayed in Trev and the
sequence may not be edited.

@sp 1
@item -editscf
Optional. By default writing to SCF is disabled for safety and reasons of
preference (we feel that all edits should be contained within an associated
Experiment File thus leaving the original trace file intact). Specifying
@code{-editscf} allows writing to SCF files.

@sp 1
@item -pregap_mode
Optional. Only used by Pregap4. This adds a Reject button to Trev
and disables certain file operations. This argument should only be used by
programs that run Trev as subprocesses for processing batches of files.

@sp 1
@item -restrict
Optional. Restricts the use of the trace editor to a single file by
disabling the ability to open another file from within Trev. The main
use of this option is for calling Trev from within scripts.

@sp 1
@item -xmag @var{value}
Optional. Defaults to 150. Specifies the magnification along the X axis
of the trace. Larger values represent higher magnifications.

@sp 1
@item -ymag @var{value}
Optional. Defaults to 10. Specifies the magnification along the Y axis
of the trace. The value should be between 10 and 100 with 10 showing all
the trace and 100 being the largest magnification.
@end table

@node Trev-Opening-Internal
@subsection Opening a trace file from within Trev
@cindex Filebrowser: Trev

To open a trace file select the "Open..." command from the File menu.
This brings up a file browser from where the trace name can be selected.
_fxref(File Browser, File Browser, filebrowser) The format of the trace
file should be selected from the row of Format buttons. Currently these
are 'ABI', 'ALF', Experiment File (_fpref(Formats-Exp, Experiment File,
formats)), 'SCF' (_fpref(Formats-Scf, SCF File, formats)), plain ASCII
text or 'any' in which case the program attempts to establish the file format
from information contained within the trace file. Opening an experiment
file opens the trace file named within the experiment file. Double
clicking on the trace name will open this trace file.

If a trace file is already open, it is closed before the new one is
opened. If the previous trace has been edited, but not saved, a dialogue
box is displayed, asking if you wish to save the file before loading a
new file. Selecting "Yes" will automatically save the file to its
current filename. Selecting "No" will discard any changes that have been
made.

_split()
@node Trev-View
@section Viewing the trace
@cindex Trev: scaling
@cindex Scaling: Trev
@cindex Trev: fonts
@cindex Fonts, within trev

The trace can be scrolled using the scrollbar directly beneath the
menubar. The trace can be magnified both in the vertical and horizontal
directions using the two scales to the left of the trace.

The base numbers, original sequence, edited sequence, confidence values
and the trace can each be switched on or off
by using the check buttons in the "Display"
option of the View menu.

The font for the original and edited sequence can be chosen from three sizes,
selectable by using the Font submenu of the View menu.

The figure below shows the bases, edited bases, a histogram of the confidence
values, the traces, and the Information Window which can be switched on
from the View Menu.

_lpicture(trev_conf_trace)

_split()
@node Trev-Searching
@subsection Searching
@cindex Trev: searching
@cindex Searching: Trev

        Selecting the "Search..." command in the View menu brings up a
window into which a text string can be entered. Pressing the "Next"
button positions the cursor at the start of the next piece of sequence
that matches the string specified in the text box. Pressing "Previous", 
finds the previous match. The search is case insensitive.

_split()
@node Trev-Information
@subsection Information
@cindex Trev: information
@cindex Information: Trev

	The comments from the SCF file of the trace can be displayed
using the "Information" option in the View menu.

_split()
@node Trev-Editing
@section Editing
@cindex Trev: editing
@cindex Editing: Trev

@node Trev-Cutoffs
@subsection Setting the left and right cutoffs
@cindex Trev: setting cutoffs
@cindex Cutoff data: Trev
@cindex Vectors, in Trev
@cindex Trev: vector sequence

	Poor data at the left and right ends of the trace can be marked
using the "Left Quality" and "Right Quality" options in the Edit menu.
Alternatively a keyboard shortcut for editing the cutoff is to press
@code{Control L} or @code{Control R} to edit left or right cutoff
respectively.  To select the left cutoff, choose the "Left Quality" option
from the menu. Then click the left mouse button at the required position in the 
trace display.
The region from the start of the sequence to this position will
be highlighted in grey. To select the right hand cutoff, choose the
"Right Quality" option in the Edit menu and click the required position in the trace
display. The region between the
left boundary and the end of the sequence will be highlighted. To prevent
accidentally changing the cutoffs once these have been selected, choose the
"Sequence" option in the Edit menu.
	
If vector sequence has been marked trev will also display these in a similar
fashion to the quality cutoffs except in a peach colour. These cutoffs can be
changed by selecting "Left Vector" and "Right Vector" in the same fashion as
editing the quality cutoffs. Where both quality and vector cutoffs coincide
trev draws the regions by striping between both peach and grey.

@node Trev-Sequence
@subsection Editing the sequence
@cindex Trev: editing the sequence
@cindex Editing the sequence: Trev

	If the ability to edit has not been disabled, there will be two
windows showing the trace sequence. The original sequence is displayed
in the upper window. The window below this, which contains the blue cursor,
is the editing window. To edit this sequence, select the "Sequence"
option in the Edit menu. The editing cursor is positioned by clicking
with the left mouse button within the display. Bases are deleted to the
left of the cursor using the delete key of the keyboard. Additional
bases are inserted to the left of the cursor. Only A, a, C, c, G, g, T,
and t are allowed. It is recommended that edits are entered in
lower case to distinguish them from the original bases.

@node Trev-Undo
@subsection Undoing clip edits
@cindex Trev: undo
@cindex Undo clip edits, trev

It is often easy to accidently forget which editing mode you are in and adjust
a quality or vector clip point by mistake. Trev keeps track of all clip edits
and hence these may be "Undone" by selecting "Undo Clipping" from the Edit
menu. This will remove the last clip edit. It is not yet possible to undo
sequence edits.

_split()
@node Trev-Save
@section Saving a trace file
@cindex Trev: saving a trace file
@cindex Saving: Trev

To save a trace file to a different file name or format choose the "Save
As..."  command from the File menu. Select the format the file is to be
saved in using the Format buttons. The output formats are CTF, SCF, ZTR,
experiment and plain text. 
Type a new name into the Selection box or
select an existing name from the list of file names. Experiment format
traces can be saved to their existing name using the "Save" option in
the File menu.

_split()
@node Trev-Files
@section Processing multiple files
@cindex Multiple files in Trev
@cindex Previous button, trev
@cindex Next button, trev
@cindex Reject button, trev
@cindex Goto file button, trev

When several trace files are specified on the command line to Trev, it will
add Previous File, Next File, and Goto File buttons. The Previous File and
Next File simply step through the specified trace files. The Goto File button
will bring up a scrollable list of all the trace files specified. Clicking on
any trace filename in this list will jump to that file.

If Trev was brought up from Pregap4, or the @code{-pregap_mode} command line
switch was used, Trev will also display a Reject button. This may be used to
indicate to Pregap4 that the trace file shown is not worthy of any clipping at
all and should be sent to the Pregap4 "failed" file.

_split()
@node Trev-Print
@section Printing a trace
@cindex Trev: printing a trace

The Print option is available via the File menu, as shown below.

_picture(trace_print_menu)

It produces a PostScript file which you must then send to the printer
yourself.

All sizes given in the dialogues explained below should be in
PostScript points (72pt = 1inch).

Defaults and available options are specified in the file
tk_utilsrc. These can be changed by copying the relevant line from
tk_utilsrc into a file called .tk_utilsrc in your home or working
directory, and then altering the settings as desired.

Note that it is not yet possible to include the histogram of confidence values
in the postscript output.

@node Trev-Print-PageOptions
@subsection Page options
@cindex Trev: page options

_picture(trace_print_page_dialogue)

@node Trev-Print-PageOptions-Paper
@subsubsection Paper options
@cindex Trev: paper options

Currently available page sizes:
@table @var
@item A4
(842 x 595)
@item A3
(1191 x 842)
@item US Letter
(792 x 612)
@end table

Please note that the page size and orientation options do not
determine the paper format that your printer will use. This must be
set externally to trev.

@node Trev-Print-PageOptions-Panels
@subsubsection Panels
@cindex Trev: print panels

Traces are printed width-ways across the page. When the right-hand
margin of the page is reached, printing continues below the current
section and from the left-hand side. A 'panel' is one page-width's
worth of trace (minus margins).

The trace and the sequence and sequence number information are printed
entirely within the given height of the panel, and the separation
gives the amount of space that is left between panels. Thus they,
together with the page height and top and bottom margins, determine
how many panels will be printed per page.

@node Trev-Print-PageOptions-Fonts
@subsubsection Fonts
@cindex Trev: print fonts

All fonts listed should be available to most PostScript printers. Most 
printers will default to Courier if a selected font is not recognised.

@node Trev-Print-TraceOptions
@subsection Trace options
@cindex Trev: trace print options

_picture(trace_print_trace_dialogue)

@node Trev-Print-TraceOptions-Title
@subsubsection Title
@cindex Trev: trace print title

The title is printed in the top left hand corner of every page. The
default is the name of the trace file.

@node Trev-Print-TraceOptions-Colour
@subsubsection Line width and colour
@cindex Trev: trace print colour and line width

The defaults are those used by the trev display.
The colours shown in the selection dialogue may not correspond exactly 
to those printed, depending on the capabilities of your printer.
Different colours will usually be printed using grey-scales on black
and white printers.

@node Trev-Print-TraceOptions-Dash
@subsubsection Dash pattern
@cindex Trev: trace print dash pattern

Dash pattern is in PostScript dash format:

	dash_1 gap_1... dash_n gap_n offset

'dash_n' and 'gap_n' are the lengths of dashes and the gaps between
them. The dash pattern starts at dash_1, continues to gap_n, then
starts again at dash_1, until the whole line has been drawn. If n = 0,
i.e. no values are given for 'dash' and 'gap', the result is a normal
unbroken line. Offset must be given, and is the distance into the dash
pattern at which the pattern should be started. The dash pattern is not
demonstrated by the example line on the ps_trace_setup dialogue.

@node Trev-Print-TraceOptions-Bases
@subsubsection Print bases
@cindex Trev: trace print bases

Allows a subsection of the trace to be printed.

The 'Visible' button sets the region to that currently displayed in
the main trev window. If the display is altered, the print base
settings will not change unless 'Visible' is pressed again. The whole
sequence is printed if the start position is greater than the end
position. The OK button will not work if the start or end positions
given are outside the range of the sequence.

@node Trev-Print-TraceOptions-Magnification
@subsubsection Print magnification
@cindex Trev: trace print magnification

The X and Y scales are taken from the trev display, and cannot
be set independently for PostScript output.

@node Trev-Print-Example
@subsection Example
@cindex Trev: trace print example

The segment of output displayed below indicates the effects
of the settings given in the example dialogue screendumps shown above.
NB: the page has been clipped to save space. The section shown is the
top part of an A4 page.

_picture(trace_print_trace1)

_split()
@node Trev-Quit
@section Quitting 
@cindex Trev: quit
@cindex Quit: Trev

To exit Trev, select the "Exit" command from the File menu. If the
sequence has been edited but not saved, a dialogue box is displayed,
asking if you wish to save the file before quitting. Selecting "Yes"
will automatically save the file to it's current filename. Selecting
"No" will discard any changes that have been made.
