
For some types of sequencing project it is convenient to view and edit the
chromatogram data prior to assembly into a gap4 database
(_fpref(Gap4-Introduction, Gap4 Introduction, gap4)),
and this is the function of the program trev.

Trev displays the original trace data, its base calls and confidence
values, and it allows the sequence of the
trace to be edited and the left and right cutoffs to be defined. 
Several file formats can be read in addition to our own Experiment Files
(_fpref(Formats-Exp, Experiment File, formats)),  and 'SCF' files
(_fpref(Formats-Scf, scf, formats)). 
Any edits made are normally saved to Experiment files, not to the 
chromatogram files which we regard as archival data. 

A typical display from trev is shown below. It includes the trace data, the
original sequence, the edited sequence, the
menu bar, and the name of the sequence being edited. The left cutoff region 
is shown shaded. 

_picture(trev_pic)


The trace can be scrolled using the scrollbar directly beneath the
menubar. The trace can be magnified in the vertical and horizontal
directions using the scale bars to the left of the trace.

The base numbers, original sequence, edited sequence, confidence values
and the trace can each be switched on or off, and the font for the
original and edited sequence is selectable.

@page
The figure below shows the bases, edited bases, a histogram of the confidence
values, the traces, and the Information Window which can be switched on
from the View Menu.

_lpicture(trev_conf_trace)

Trev uses ``io_lib'' for handling the various sequencing instrument
file formats. This means it has support for ABI, MegaBace (when saved
in ABI format), SCF (used by LiCor and some other manufacturers), ZTR
and SFF (454).

The above pictures all come from instruments using the Sanger
sequencing method, however more recently support has been added for
pyrosequencing methods (as used by 454 Life Sciences amongst
others). An example of this is below.

_lpicture(trev_pyro_trace)

Trev can be used to produce postscript
files of the traces so that they can be printed. The colours, line
widths, etc are configurable. An example is shown in the figure below.
 
_picture(trace_print_trace1)

Note that we strongly 
recommend that readings are not edited prior to assembly as it is far better
to edit them when their alignment with other readings can be seen.

