
@cindex vector_clip: man page
@unnumberedsec NAME

vector_clip --- finds and marks vector segments in sequence readings

@unnumberedsec SYNOPSIS


@code{vector_clip} @code{-}[@code{schr}]
[@code{-w} @i{word_length (4)}] [@code{-n} @i{num_diags (7)}]
[@code{-d} @i{diagonal_score (0.35)}] [@code{-l} @i{minimum_match (20/70%)}]
[@code{-m} @i{minimum_5'_position}] [@code{-t}] [@code{-p}
@i{passed_fofn}] [@code{-f} @i{failed_fofn}] @i{input_fofn}

@unnumberedsec DESCRIPTION

@code{vector_clip} finds and marks vector segments in sequence readings stored
in experiment file format. For sequencing vectors it can be used to find the
5' primer and, for short inserts, the sequence to the 3' side of the cloning
site. It can also be used to find 3' primer sequences. A further option can do
a final check for any vector rearrangements that could be missed by the more
specific searches around the cloning site. For cloning vectors it will search
both orientations of the sequence and mark any segments found.  The vector
sequences must be stored as simple text files. For cloning vector
searches the reading's experiment file must contain the name of the
cloning vector file. For sequencing vector searches, either the experiment
file for each reading must contain the information about the vector
sequence (the file name, cloning site and primer offset) or
vector-primer files must be used. Vector-primer files contain sets of
sequences from around cloning sites, and vector_clip can use these to
find the vector that matches each reading best. If the match is above
the cutoff score the reading is clipped. Vector-primer files are the
simplest method of providing vector_clip with the data it needs for
finding sequencing vectors. More information is available elsewhere
(_fpref(Vector_Clip, Screening Against Vector Sequences, t)).


The program processes batches of readings by the use of file of file names:
one is used for input and two for output. The input file lists the names of
all the readings to process, one name per line. One output file contains the
names of all the readings that pass the screening and the other contains the
names of those that fail.

@unnumberedsec OPTIONS

@table @code
@item -s
Mark sequencing vector. Searches for 5' primer, 3' running into vector.
@item -c
Mark cloning vector. Searches both strands for cloning vector.
@item -h
Hgmp primer. Searches 3' end for a primer.
@item -i vector_primer filename
Mark transposon data.
@item -r
Vector rearrangements. Searches for sequencing vector rearrangements.
@item -t
Test only. Does not change the experiment files, displays hits.
@end table

@table @var
@item @code{-L} minimum percentage match 5' end (60)
sequencing vector searches and transposon search
@item @code{-R} minimum percentage match 3' end (80)
sequencing vector searches and transposon search
@item @code{-m} minimum 5' position
allows a minimum 5' end cutoff to be set if a sufficiently good match is not 
found (i.e. it is really a default 5' cutoff position). 
If a value of -1 is used the program will set the cutoff to be the 
distance between the primer and the cloning site.
@item @code{-v} vector-primer-pair filename
sequencing vector search using vector-primer-pair file
@item @code{-V} vector_primer length
the length of the sequence stored in the vector_primer file to use for
the 5' search
@item @code{-w} word_length (4)
cloning vector search hash length
@item @code{-P} probability
cloning vector search, (a score less likely than P is a match)
@item @code{-n} num_diags (7)
cloning vector search, old score based algorithm: number of diagonals to combine
@item @code{-d} diagonal score (0.35)
cloning vector search, old score based algorithm
@item @code{-l} minimum match (20)
sequencing vector rearrangements and transposon search minimum match length
@item @code{-M} maximum vector length (100000)
all algorithms, reset for vectors >100000 bases
@item @code{-p} passed fofn
file of file names for passed files
@item @code{-f} failed fofn
file of file names for failed files
@item input fofn ...
input file of file names
@end table

@unnumberedsec EXAMPLES

@example
Usage: vector_clip [options] file_of_filenames
Where options are:
    [-s mark sequencing vector]      [-c mark cloning vector]
    [-h hgmp primer]                 [-r vector rearrangements]
    [-w word_length (4)]             [-n num_diags (7)]
    [-d diagonal score (0.35)]       [-l minimum match (20)]
    [-L minimum % 5' match (60)]     [-R minimum % 3' match (80)]
    [-m default 5' position]         [-t test only]
    [-M Max vector length (100000)]  [-P max Probability]
    [-v vector_primer filename]      [-i vector_primer filename]
    [-V vector_primer length]
    [-p passed fofn]                 [-f failed fofn]
@end example


Screen for sequencing vector using 5' cutoff of 70%, a 3' cutoff of 90%
and default 5' primer position of 30. The batch of files to process are
named in files.in, the names of the passed files are written to
files.pass and the names of those that fail to files.fail.


@example
@code{vector_clip -s -L70 -R90 -m30 -pfiles.pass -f files.fail files.in}
@end example

Screen for sequencing vector using 5' cutoff of 60%, a 3' cutoff of 80%
and default 5' primer position of 30. The batch of files to process are
named in files.in, the names of the passed files are written to
files.pass and the names of those that fail to files.fail. This shows
that the default search is for sequencing vector.


@example
@code{vector_clip -m30 -pfiles.pass -f files.fail files.in}
@end example

Screen for sequencing vector using 5' cutoff of 60%, a 3' cutoff of 80%
and a vector-primer-pair file called vector_primer_file. 
The batch of files to process are
named in files.in, the names of the passed files are written to
files.pass and the names of those that fail to files.fail.


@example
@code{vector_clip -v vector_primer_file -pfiles.pass -f files.fail files.in}
@end example

Screen transposon data using 5' cutoff of 80%, a 3' cutoff of 85%, a match length of 10
and a vector-primer-pair file called vector_primer_file. 
The batch of files to process are
named in files.in, the names of the passed files are written to
files.pass and the names of those that fail to files.fail.


@example
@code{vector_clip -i vector_primer_file -L 80 -R 85 -l 10 -pfiles.pass \}
@code{            -f files.fail files.in}
@end example


Screen for cloning vector using the old algorithm with a word length of 4, 
summing 7 diagonals and diagonal cutoff score of 0.4. 
The batch of files to process are
named in files.in, the names of the passed files are written to
files.pass and the names of those that fail to files.fail.


@example
@code{vector_clip -c -w4 -n7 -d0.4 -pfiles.pass -f files.fail files.in}
@end example

Screen for cloning vector using the probability based algorithm with a 
word length of 4 and probability cutoff of 1.0e-13.
The batch of files to process are
named in files.in, the names of the passed files are written to
files.pass and the names of those that fail to files.fail.


@example
@code{vector_clip -c -P 1.0e-13 -pfiles.pass -f files.fail files.in}
@end example


Screen for 3' primer using a cutoff of 75%.
The batch of files to process are
named in files.in, the names of the passed files are written to
files.pass and the names of those that fail to files.fail.

@example
@code{vector_clip -h -R75 -pfiles.pass -f files.fail files.in}
@end example

Screen for sequencing vector rearrangements using a cutoff of 20 bases.
The batch of files to process are
named in files.in, the names of the passed files are written to
files.pass and the names of those that fail to files.fail.

@example
@code{vector_clip -r -l20 -pfiles.pass -f files.fail files.in}
@end example

@unnumberedsec NOTES

The following error messages can be generated.

@cindex Vector_Clip: error codes
@enumerate 1
@item Error: could not open experiment file
@item Error: no sequence in experiment file
@item Error: sequence too short
@item Error: missing vector file name
@item Error: missing cloning site
@item Error: missing primer site
@item Error: could not open vector file
@item Error: could not write to experiment file
@item Error: could not read vector file
@item Error: missing primer sequence
@item Error: hashing problem
@item Error: alignment problem
@item Error: invalid cloning site
@item Warning: sequence now too short (no message)
@item Warning: sequence entirely cloning vector (no message)
@item Warning: possible vector rearrangement (no message)
@item Warning: error parsing vector_primer file
@item Warning: primer pair mismatch!
@item Aborting: more than X entries in vector_primer file
@end enumerate

@i{SL}, @i{SR}, @i{CL}, @i{CR}, @i{CS}, @i{PS}, @i{PR} and @i{SF}
records are written to the experiment files.

@unnumberedsec SEE ALSO


_fxref(Formats-Exp,Experiment File, formats) 


For notes on defining the cloning and primer sites,
_fxref(Vector_Clip-Sites, Defining the Positions of Cloning and Primer Sites for Vector_Clip, vector_clip)


_fxref(Formats-Scf, scf(4), formats)
